Management of Hazardous Trees in Fire Killed Ash Areas


Table of Contents
1.	Purpose	1
2.	Scope	1
3.	Background	3
4.	Risk Assessment	3
5.	Treatment Option	4
6.	Procedure	4
7.	Appendix 1: Maps of Fire Killed Ash & Affected Roads	6
8.	Appendix 2: Road Status	6
9.	Definitions	7
10.	References	7
11.	Stakeholder Consultation 	7
12.	Document History 	8

1. Purpose
This document outlines the procedure Melbourne Water (MW) will undertake to mitigate the risk of injury or death from falling trees or branches in the fire killed ash forests of the water supply catchments.
2. Scope
This procedure applies to all Melbourne Water Employees and Contractors working in locations containing fire killed ash areas such as the Armstrong, O’Shannassy and Wallaby Creek catchments. Maps of each catchment and the affected roads are contained in Appendix 1: Maps of Fire Killed Ash & Affected Roads.



3. Background
The 2009 Black Saturday fires killed and damage an enormous number of trees outside and within the water supply catchments for Melbourne particularly the ash forests. The water supply catchments with the majority of fire killed ash forest are Wallaby Creek, O’Shannassy and Armstrong Creek. The dead and damaged trees within these catchments will inevitably fall. This will expose road users and catchment maintenance staff to the risk of death or injury from falling limbs and trees. Melbourne Water has the legislated responsibility to take reasonable steps to minimise risk to staff and contractors in the workplace. 
Falling trees and limbs are a natural occurrence in any forested environment. The risk from this natural occurrence to employees and contractors increases with unfavourable weather conditions such as wind, rain and snow. Risk is also influenced by the frequency and duration of visits to forested areas, increasing exposure time to the natural occurrence.
As these fire killed trees age their strength and stability will deteriorate and the likelihood of trees and branches falling and dropping will increase. It is impossible to assess when exactly any trees will drop branches or fall. 
3.1 Current Practices
Currently MW has the following procedures and documents, which are implemented for tasks undertaken by MW and contractors in the forest environment.
• Task Risk Assessments
• Good to Go 
• Inductions
• Fact Sheet - Falling Trees and Branches April 2011	
4. Risk Assessment
To eliminate the risk of MW employees and contractors being injured or killed by falling trees and branches killed in fire killed ash areas, every tree capable of reaching the road would need to be removed.
Limitations to removing every tree that would reach the road include:
• The scale of the area to be treated. Clearing required would be in excess of 100 metres on either side of the road due to topography and height of trees.
• Access and topography. The terrain is too steep to safely carry out any clearing operations. 
• The cost of this work is expensive (up to $70,000 per km). 
• The impact on biodiversity and cultural values can be very high. 
In determining the level of risk to MW employees and contractors the MW Risk Assessment Tool taken from the Risk Management Procedure CORP GOV PRO has been applied. 
The likelihood of an incident depends on a number of factors including frequency and duration of road use (the exposure to the risk), tree density and condition and the weather conditions at the time of exposure.

Likelihood
The likelihood of being struck by a falling tree or limb , a rating of likely will be applied. 
Consequence
The consequence of an incident is likely to result in fatalities or serious permanent impairment, so a rating of Severe will be applied. 
Likelihood Rating 
4. Likely
Risk is likely to occur (once every 1-2 years)
Consequence rating 
5. Severe
MW 
Safety & Wellbeing
Risk rating 
Extreme

Table 1: Risk Assessment
5. Treatment Option 
Avoid -  Avoid the activity that leads to the risk
6. Procedure
When entering fire killed ash areas 
1. Please determine location and roads that will be travelled. 
2. Refer to attached maps and table in Appendix 1 and Appendix 2
3. Have the roads been treated? 
4. Apply the entry option matrix 
5. Apply the entry option matrix
Note: Treated Road - all trees are removed 10 meters from the road edge

Entry option matrix for fire killed ash roads
Weather Conditions 

Untreated Road
Treated Road*


Fire Killed Ash 
Light Winds
up to 19km/hr. Wind felt on face; leaves rustle


Machine work with FOPS

On foot with care
Moderate Winds
20-29km/hr. Raises dust; small branches are moved

No go

Machine work with FOPS

Drive through with care
Fresh Winds
30-39km/hr. Small trees in leaf begin to sway

No go

No go
Strong Winds
40+km/hr. Large branches in motion

No go

No go




7. Appendix 1: Maps of Fire Killed Ash & Affected Roads
• Fire Killed Ash Area Overview Map - OShannassy - A1.pdf
• Fire Killed Ash Area Overview Map - Wallaby Creek - A2.pdf
• Armstrong - A3.pdf
• OShannassy - A3.pdf
• Wallaby Creek - A3.pdf
8. Appendix 2: Road Status 
Map 1: Armstrong
Armstrong 
Roads treated 
Roads with no treatment
Road 1

Observation Rd

Road 2

Road 7


Map 2: O’Shannassy
O’Shannassy 
Roads treated
Roads with no treatment
Road 1

Road 8 

Road 5

Road 12

Road 9

Road 7





Map 3: Wallaby Creek
Wallaby Creek 
Roads treated
Roads with no treatment
Road 1 
Road 2
Road 13(part)
Road 54
Road 53 (part) 
Road 14
Road 4
Road 15
Road 10
Road 3

Road 12

Road 13(part)

Road 53 (part)

9. Definitions
Reference
Definition
Essential
A road without which fire response and suppression in an area would be severely compromised. This would include critical fire-fighting infrastructure, such Heli-Pads, Fire Towers, Critical Water Points, Strategic fire trails and breaks or,
Infrastructure Roads are roads that are critical in the management of the water supply system and give access to pump stations, portals, diversion weirs and aqueducts.
10. References
Document title
MW Road Strategy
Fact Sheet - Falling Trees and Branches April 2011
11. Stakeholder Consultation 
Stakeholders
Water Supply Catchments and Bushfire Team
Maintenance & Contracts – Water Civil Maintenance Team
People & Safety Team
Parks Victoria
Department of Environment and Primary Industry
Country Fire Authority
12. Document History 
Date
Reviewed/
Actioned By
Version
Action
August 2020
Senior Asset Practitioner
24
Document review and template update. 
February 2016
Senior Asset Practitioner
23
Reformatted document into a standard SOP template.
November 2014
Senior Asset Practitioner
22
Updated to new template, to include document and version control.
Updated Fire Killed Ash Area Maps (November 2014)
Renamed Document:
CORP H&S PRO Management of Hazardous Trees in Fire Killed Ash Areas
Moved to SMS Folder location in IMS.




Management of Hazardous Trees in Fire Killed Ash Areas
Standard Operating Procedure



Doc ID: 24887785
Page 8 of 8
Version: 24
Date: 04/2020
Doc Name: AM SOP Management of Hazardous Trees in Fire Killed Ash
Author: Senior Asset Practitoner
Approver: CAM Team Lead
Document uncontrolled if printed


CORP AM WI AMIS Classification Management 

Purpose
The purpose of this work instruction is to ensure the correct configuration of AMIS (Maximo) Classifications
Scope
This document relates to the creation and update of Classifications within the AMIS (Maximo).

Procedure
Requests for classification changes will be sent to the Asset Knowledge and Systems team through the IT Support email and managed through the Service Desk management application as documented within the CORP AM PRO AMIS Classification Management Procedure (add hyperlink once loaded)



































1. Creation of New Classifications
1.1. Navigate to the Classification Module within AMIS
1.1.1. Go To: Administration\Classifications
1.2. Create new Classification
1.2.1. Select action: Add\Modify Properties Classification
1.2.2. Click New Row
1.2.3. Enter Classification ID in the Classification Field
Note that except for Oniqua INC’s the Classification should be plain English e.g. Plug Valve
1.2.4. Enter Classification Description in the description field
1.2.5. Click New OK
1.2.6. You will be returned to the Classification Screen
1.2.7. Select New
1.2.8. Enter or select the classification you just created in the classification field
1.2.9. Select the Parent Classification by clicking the >> symbol and selecting “Select Parent Classification” this will open the Classification drill down menu.

1.2.10. Click the blue square to select 
1.2.11. Deselect the Generate Description checkbox (If auto description generation based on the classification and attributes is required see section 2.6)
1.2.12. Deselect the Use Classification Checkbox
1.2.13. Save the Record
1.2.14. The classification will have inherited the Use With data from the parent classification along with any Attributes forced down the hierarchy from the parent classification
1.2.15. If the use with section includes objects not specified in the request delete any rows which are not appropriate and save the record.
1.2.16. If the use with section does not include the required object from the request then refer the classification to the governing body, either the CoP or the Asset Strategy and Performance Team for advice.
2. Modifying an Existing Classification
2.1. Adding Attributes to New or existing classifications
2.1.1. Open the relevant Classification
2.1.2. On the Attributes table Click New Row
2.1.3. Select the Attribute from the list
2.1.4. If the attribute applies to all use with objects save record
2.1.5. If the attribute applies only to some of the objects click the use with object detail button  and modify the check boxes as appropriate
2.1.6. Save the record.
2.1.7. The system will apply the attribute to all objects with this classification where is now applies
2.2. Removing an Attribute from a Classification
2.2.1. Open the relevant Classification
2.2.2. If the attribute is to be removed from only one of the use with objects click the use with object detail button  and modify the check boxes as appropriate
2.2.3. If the attribute is to be removed from the classification entirely click the rubbish bin icon adjacent to the attribute.
2.2.4. Saving the record will delete the removed attribute(s) for all objects with this classification where the setting has changed.
Note: For classifications with many associated record objects this can take a significant amount of time to complete.
2.3. Creating a new Attribute
2.3.1. From the Classifications Module
2.3.2. Select action Add\Modify Properties Attributes
2.3.3. Click New Row
2.3.4. Enter the Attribute Name
2.3.5. Enter the Attribute Description
2.3.6. Enter the Attribute Unit of Measure
2.3.7. Select the data type, Num, Aln or Table (it would be rare to use table as this works from live data in the table specified)
2.3.8. If required select the relevant Use with Object
Note: this locks the attribute to only be for one object type (MW Customisation).
2.3.9. If the attribute has a domain set which relates select this in the Domain field
2.3.10. Save Record
2.4. Adding an Activity to a classification
2.4.1. Open the relevant Classification
2.4.2. On the Activities tab Click New Row
2.4.3. Select the Activity from the list
2.4.4. Save the record

Note: there is a Cron Task which will automatically apply this activity to all asset or location records using this classification it is not necessary to bulk load them.


2.5. Removing an Activity from a classification
2.5.1. Open the relevant Classification
2.5.2. On the Activities tab Click the rubbish bin icon adjacent to the Activity
2.5.3. Repeat as required
2.5.4. Save the record

Note 1: the system will automatically remove the activities from the all asset or location records using this classification it is not necessary to bulk remove them.

Note 2: removing the Activity from an Asset or Location where there is a PM or Job Plan which specifies this Activity will stop the PM from creating Workorders and prevent the job plan from being applied to a Workorder raised on the asset or location.

2.6. Adding an Attribute to All Classifications below a parent Classification
If an attribute is applicable to all classifications below a point in the classification hierarchy then the attribute can be set on the relevant parent and the checkbox Apply down Hierarchy checked.
2.6.1. Open the relevant Classification
2.6.2. On the Attributes table Expand the Attribute details using the icon next to it.
2.6.3. Check the Apply Down Hierarchy Checkbox
2.6.4. Save the record
2.6.5. The Attribute will be applied to each of the child classifications and will show on the child record as Inherited from the relevant parent classification

Note: If the location hierarchy is reorganised with the child classification moved elsewhere it will not be possible to delete the Attribute from the child classification without moving it again.

Note: if it is found that there is a common set of attributes for all the child classifications the effort should be made to move those attributes an inherit them.



2.7. Setting up classifications for automatic description generation of objects.
Classifications can be set to automatically compile the description based on the classification, attributes, Attribute unit of measure and a prefix to the attribute information for any object they are applied to, this should be encouraged in the Inventory management processes but is not mandatory. It could readily be applied to Assets, it would be ill advised to apply this to locations at the present time. 

2.7.1. Open the relevant Classification
2.7.2. Check the Generate Description check box
2.7.3. If the classification is to form part of the Naming convention then check the “Use Classification” check box .
Note: this will be applied to all Use With Objects there is no more control on this
2.7.4. If the attributes are to be used from only one of the use with objects click the use with object detail button  and modify the check boxes as appropriate including setting the sequence number.
2.7.5. Expand the attribute and set any prefix required.
2.7.6. Ensure there is a Unit of Measure set if required.
2.7.7. Save the record
2.7.8. The automatic description is applied when the classification is added to the object and the record saved. * need to check all circumstances, maybe on asset record save as well?
Note that the description can still be manually overwritten. * change on spec change save?


2.8. Setting Attributes as Mandatory
2.8.1. Open the relevant Classification
2.8.2. Open the use with object detail button  and check the mandatory checkbox as appropriate
2.8.3. Save the record.
2.8.4. Any time a record with the classification is saved the system will test for data in this attribute and refuse to save without something being entered.

Note: making attributes mandatory breaks the original Fujitsu delivered Asset and Location bulk load sheets as the attributes are loaded via a separate sheet. The recently developed bulk loader pushes the full data set at once and so works, and it will notify the user of any missing mandatory attributes when the validation is run.



3. Melbourne Water Customised fields
Melbourne Water customised the Classification Module in the following ways. Addition of Activities, addition of the ability to set an attribute to being able to be used with only one Object

The fields in the following image are all Melbourne Water customisations

3.1.1. Open the relevant Classification
3.1.2. Base Life is used to set the expected life from the date of acquisition for any Asset in this classification, the domain set of base life is in increments of 10 from 10 to 250 
3.1.3. Unit of Measure sets the unit of measure on an Asset or Location and is automatically copied to the Location or Asset record when the classification is applied.
3.1.4. Depreciation Method defines the depreciation method for all asset records using this classification. The default Melbourne Water depreciation method is straight line (over the Base Life).
3.1.5. Related Assets controls the number of Inservice Asset records which may be associated with a Location Record. The Values are 0, 1 or N and Maximo with then allow 0, 1 or many Assets in that location. If left blank the system treats it as N.
3.1.6. GIS Shape is used to indicate the type of GIS data associated with the classification, Polygon, Point or Line (currently a free text field). (Data quality indicator)
3.1.7. GIS Managed is used to indicate that the Attribute Data is set from the GIS rather than being entered via the Maximo interface. This functionality is not currently active (This may be implemented when MapInfo is replaced by ArcGIS).
3.1.8. GIS Representation is used to flag classifications where all objects classified as such must have a corresponding GIS object. There is no functionality around this. (Data quality indicator)
3.1.9. Performance Data indicates that all objects classified with this should have performance data meters associated, (Data quality indicator)
3.1.10. Condition Data indicates that all objects classified with this should have condition data meters associated. (Data quality indicator)
3.1.11. Valuation Data indicates that all objects classified with this should have valuation data meters associated. (Data quality indicator)
3.1.12. Check or enter data as required.
3.1.13. Save the record.


Definitions 
(Optional – Remove if not required)
Reference
Definition


References 
(Optional – Remove if not required)
Standards and Related Documents

Document History
Date
Reviewed/ Actioned By
Version
Action
Oct 2018
Stuart Smith
1.0
Create

CORP AM WI AMIS Classification Management 
Work Instruction

Doc Name: CORP AM WI AMIS Classification Management
Author: Asset Management Strategist
Version: 1.0 (Should match Inflo Version Number)
Page 2 of 7
Approver: Add Position Title
Doc ID: Match Inflo Document Number
Document Uncontrolled if Printed
Approved: Oct/2018


Building Regulations Buffer Generation

1. Purpose
This document outlines the rules used by two FME (Feature Manipulation Engine) workspaces to generate the Building Regulations GIS tables.
2. Scope
The two Building Regulations GIS tables relate to the Building Regulations Act 2018, REG 154 - Building on Designated Land or Works. 

The tables are located on Q: drive under the ‘Landuse’ folder.
3. MW Asset Protection Zone
The MW_Asset_Protection_Zone GIS table is used internally by Melbourne Water’s Asset Services team for the purpose of determining build-over impacts to our assets. It includes civil assets related to Waterways, Water Supply and Sewerage, and Melbourne Water owned land.
The buffering rules are tailored to each particular type of Melbourne Water asset.
Table 1: Asset type and buffering rule
Asset Type
Buffering Rule
Retarding Basins
5m buffer around crest
MWC-Owned Land
5m buffer around fence line
Underground Pipes
5m plus half pipe diameter buffer (where pipe diameter is known)
Underground Pipes
10m buffer (where pipe diameter is unknown)
Hardlined Channels
5m plus half of channel width buffer
Non-hardlined Channels
20m plus half of channel width buffer
Hardlined Channels
10m buffer (where channel width is unknown)
Non-hardlined Channels
50m buffer (where channel width is unknown)

‘Underground Pipes’ include Waterways, Water Supply and Sewerage assets.
‘Hardlined Channels’ include Waterways assets only, where construction materials make the channel bed largely impervious (concrete, bluestone, brickwork).
4. MW Designated Works
The MW_Designated_Works GIS table is used externally by Councils to indicate when works will be within 20m of Melbourne Water assets. It includes only Waterways natural and civil assets (both above-ground and below-ground).
A standard 20m buffer is applied to all linear Waterways centreline assets (underground pipes, channels and natural waterways).
The buffer Includes a special 'Yarra_Maribyrnong_TopOfBank' GIS table to better define the lower reaches of the Yarra and Maribyrnong Rivers, where those waterways are much greater than 40m in width. A 20m centreline buffer would underestimate the extent of the banks considerably in those areas.
5. Running the FME Workspaces
Copies of the two FME workspaces can be found on M: drive:
M:\MEL\Info Systems\General\Building_Regulations_FME_Buffer_Workspaces
FME_ MW_Asset_Protection_Zone.fmw can be copied to any folder on any local or network drive, and the output will be written to the same folder as the FMW file is in. You must have Q: drive mapped to be able to run the workspace in FME.
FME_ MW_Designated_Works.fmw has the additional requirement that a copy of the ‘Yarra_Maribyrnong_TopOfBank’ GIS table must also be in the same folder as the FMW file.
Ensure that FME (Feature Manipulation Engine) is installed on your computer. Open each FMW file in turn into FME Workbench and run the translation. 
The resulting GIS tables are then copied to Q:\GIS_UPDT\Landuse, replacing the existing tables. Copying files to Q:\GIS_UPDT requires the relevant write permissions. To obtain write permissions to Q:\GIS_UPDT, contact Melbourne Water’s IT Support Service (this may require manager approval). 
The new GIS tables will be copied to Q:\GISData_GDA94\Landuse overnight via an automated update process, becoming available to the business the next morning (provided the update process runs successfully).
6. Responsibilities
Role
Responsibility
Data Officer – Waterways & Drainage
Run the two Building Regulations FME workspaces on a weekly basis, and copy the newly-generated GIS tables to Q:\GIS_UPDT\Landuse
7. Definitions
Reference
Definition
FME
Feature Manipulation Engine. An application used to convert or manipulate data (especially spatial data). 
Website: https://www.safe.com/ 
GIS
Geographic Information System. A database system that links attribute information to spatial objects.
Sewerage
The system of infrastructure that transports or treats sewage.
Water Supply
The system of infrastructure that transports or treats drinking water.
Waterways
The system of infrastructure that transports surface drainage, primarily from rainfall (includes natural and civil assets).
8. References
Document title
Building Regulations Act 2018, REG 154 - Building on Designated Land or Works.
Water Act 1989, Part 10, Section 188A - Designated waterways, land or works - Melbourne Water Corporation
Water Act 1989, Part 10, Section 194 - Works that interfere with designated land or works
9. Document History 
Date
Reviewed/
Actioned By
Version
Action
August 2017
Waterways Drainage Data Officer
1
Document created
September 2020
Waterways Drainage Data Officer
2
Renamed GIS tables




Building Regulations Buffer Generation
Work Instruction





Doc ID: 41566028
Page 3 of 3
Version: 2
Date: 09/2020
Doc Name: AM WI Building Regulations Buffer Generation
Author: Waterways Drainage Data Officer
Approver: Asset Data Leader
Document uncontrolled if printed



Children Update Process - Determining Flood Mapping Encumbrance Clauses 

Purpose
Three retail water companies (City West Water, South East Water & Yarra Valley Water) send property children information to Melbourne Water on a weekly basis for the determination of flood mapping encumbrance clauses.

Scope
The process requires the following software packages:
• Microsoft Outlook
• A text file editor (e.g. Notepad)
• Microsoft Excel
• Microsoft Access
• FME (Feature Manipulation Engine)
• Mapinfo
Procedure

1. Accessing the Encumbrance Correspondence Mailbox	1
2. Copying Retail Files to I: Drive	3
3. Using the FME Workspace	5
4. Creating Data Maintenance Projects Database Entries	5
5. Updating the ‘Kids’ Mapinfo Tables on I: Drive	7

1. Accessing the Encumbrance Correspondence Mailbox
Open Outlook. Right-click on your mailbox and select ‘Data File Properties’



Click the ‘Advanced…’ button, and then the ‘Advanced’ tab in the second window



Click the ‘Add…’ button, and enter the name of the mailbox to connect to: Encumbrance Correspondence. Click ‘OK’ three times. You should now be able to access the ‘Encumbrance Correspondence’ mailbox.

2. Copying Retail Files to I: Drive
There should be three emails from the retail companies containing child properties to process. Each will have at least one file attached to them. Their subject lines will be:

• Melbourne Water Property Creation Report (CWW)
• New Property Extract and Grid Coordinates (SEW)
• Melbourne Water New SLID File (YVW)

Move them into the ‘Children Update’ subfolder of the ‘Encumbrance Correspondence’ mailbox.

Create folders on I: drive in which to store the files. Go to:
I:\MEL\Flood Mapping\GIS\Children

There will be a folder for each of the retail companies (CWW, SEW & YVW). Within each is a folder called ‘Import’, containing separate folders for each calendar year. Within the appropriate calendar year folder, create a new folder using the batch date (YYYYMMDD) of the child submission as the folder name. This date is always a Friday.



Create identical new folders within each of the three retail company sections (CWW, SEW & YVW). You can simply copy the first (empty) folder and paste it into the two other locations.

The City West Water child report email will have an Excel spreadsheet called ‘Melbourne Water Property Creation Report.xls’. Save the attached file to the new folder you created under the CWW folder. This child report will need further modification.

Open the spreadsheet in Excel and save it as a CSV file. Rename the CSV file to match the batch date, and change the extension to TXT (e.g. 20170505.txt). Open that text file into a text editor (such as Notepad), and delete the first six lines. Bulk-replace all of the quotation marks with empty strings. Also, bulk-replace a sequence of six commas with empty strings.



The end result should look more like this:



Save the changes to the text file.

The SEW and YVW text files will not require any modification. SEW usually sends two text files each week (NCOUT and NPOUT).

Copy all four text files into the following folder:
I:\MEL\Flood Mapping\GIS\Children\FME_Workspace\Input_Files 

Rename them as CWW.txt, SEW_NC.txt, SEW_NP.txt and YVW.txt.

3. Using the FME Workspace
Ensure that you have a copy of FME (Feature Manipulation Engine) installed on your computer. If not, send a request to the IT Helpdesk to have it installed.

Run the ‘FM_Children_Clauses.fmw’ FME workspace, located in the following folder:
I:\MEL\Flood Mapping\GIS\Children\FME_Workspace 

The FME process should take between one and two minutes to run. Exit FME once it has completed. If there is no floating licence available, try again later.

The following files will be written to
 I:\MEL\Flood Mapping\GIS\Children\FME_Workspace\Output_Files

• Coordinate_Errors.csv
• A ‘Combined_Weekly_Points’ Mapinfo table (four associated files)
• INFOSTMTCLAUSEUPD-CWW_OUTPUT_xxx_records.csv
• SEW_OUTPUT_xxx_records.csv
• YVW_OUTPUT_xxx_records.csv

The first file will contain any retail property entries that had non-valid coordinates. Add the batch date to the file name of the coordinate error CSV file. For example, Coordinate_Errors_20171020.csv

The Mapinfo table will contain the combined valid points for all three retail companies, with their flood mapping encumbrance clauses populated.

The three ‘OUTPUT’ CSV files are the retail upload templates containing the new clauses for each property. Change the extension of the CWW file to TXT instead of CSV. Add the batch date to the file names. For example, YVW_OUTPUT_20171020_643_records.csv.

4. Creating Data Maintenance Projects Database Entries
Open the ‘Data_Maintenance_Projects_DB.mdb’ MS Access file located in the following folder:
M:\MEL\Info Systems\Information Maintenance\Projects 

Click the ‘Job Requests’ button



Click the yellow cross button to create a new database entry for each retail company.



Click the ‘Create Folder’ button to create a new jobs folder for each new database entry (once the ‘Job Folder’ text box is populated). The ‘Open Folder’ button will open each new jobs folder into separate Windows Explorer windows.

Exit the Access database when all three job entries have been created.
Copy the relevant output files from I:\MEL\Flood Mapping\GIS\Children\FME_Workspace\Output_Files to each newly created jobs folder. 

Send an email to the Encumbrance Correspondence email address that links to the new database folders.



5. Updating the ‘Kids’ Mapinfo Tables on I: Drive
Open the ‘Kids_Tables.wor’ Mapinfo workspace found at I:\MEL\Flood Mapping\GIS\Children\FME_Workspace.

Use the ‘Table -> Update Column’ function in Mapinfo to populate the ‘Batch_Date’ field in the ‘Combined_Weekly_Points’ Mapinfo table. E.g. 05/05/2017. Save the table.

Query the points from ‘Combined_Weekly_Points’ for each of the three retailers.




For the other retailers, the queries would be:

• Retailer = "YVW"
• Retailer like "SEW%"

Copy the results of each query and paste them into the relevant ‘Kids’ table.

• Cww_retailerprops 		(CWW)
• Sew_kids2			(SEW)
• YVW_Kids 			(YVW)

Save each table and exit Mapinfo.

Definitions 
Reference
Definition
CWW
City West Water (retail water company)
Children
New properties created by subdividing larger properties
FME
Feature Manipulation Engine
SEW
South East Water (retail water company)
YVW
Yarra Valley Water (retail water company)








Stakeholder Consultation 
The rules governing the FME workbench were created in consultation with the Melbourne Water Flood Mapping & Mitigation team.

Document History
Date
Reviewed/ Actioned By
Version
Action
20/10/2017
Dann Pigdon
1.0
Document Creation


Children Update Process - Determining Flood Mapping Encumbrance Clauses 


Doc Name: Children Flood Mapping Encumbrance Procedure
Author: Data Officer – Waterways & Drainage
Version: 1.0
Page 1 of 8
Approver: Asset Data Leader 
Doc ID: 
Document Uncontrolled if Printed
Approved: Jan 2018



Assigning Meters to Assets and Locations in AMIS

1. Purpose
The purpose of this procedure is to inform and support asset managers and other associated roles in the assignation of asset condition monitoring records in the Asset Management Information System (AMIS).
This procedure will outline the general process and workflow for assigning asset condition and performance meters in AMIS. 
2. Scope
This document relates to the implementation of asset condition monitoring records (i.e. Meters) in the AMIS environment. The procedure contained within this document is to be followed by asset managers and other associated roles when a meter is deemed to be required to be assigned to an asset/location for the purposes of condition monitoring.
3. Use of Meters for recording Condition and Performance information in AMIS.
AMIS provides asset managers with the means to systematically deliver condition and performance measurement and monitoring of assets and locations. This information can be used to satisfy regulatory reporting commitments, drive pro-active maintenance programs and provide the raw data necessary to inform strategic analysis and trending of change in condition and performance of assets over time.
In the AMIS environment, Meters are simply pre-defined database fields which can be associated with objects in the system to provide logical repositories for information capture and retention
Asset managers utilise meters by associating them in AMIS with selected assets/locations of interest and also the job plan tasks within the PMs which instruct the service provider to take observational action and record their findings.
4.  When do I use a Meter?
Meter information is captured via Work order tasks and can be used for reporting and analysis purposes or in conjunction with a condition monitoring point to initiate corrective or preventative maintenance. 
Where meters are used to capture data for reporting purposes only, they are intended to satisfy associated business needs such as regulatory compliance and the provision of data to external stakeholders.
Meter data can originate from a variety of activities and sources:
• Inspection PM programs (e.g. Drain CCTV inspection)
• Prior Work order
• Performance parameter from Lab data, SCADA or PCS7 (e.g. flow rate)
• Status parameter from SCADA or PCS7 (e.g. Run hours)
• NDT monitoring (e.g. Vibration analysis)
Meter data can be entered into AMIS via the following channels:
• Direct entry via the Desktop application
• Direct entry via the mobile ‘Works Execution’ app on iPads
• Bulk upload using a spreadsheet template
5. When don’t I use a Meter?
Meters are only used to capture data which directly correlates to a need for corrective/preventative action or corporate reporting requirements. 
Meters are not used to capture data that is otherwise irrelevant to condition, performance or corporate reporting. (e.g. Work order feedback codes, Logs, PCR, reporting asset failure, etc.) AMIS has specific applications and functions to cater to these data types.
If there is no business need to monitor, maintain or report condition of an asset or location, AMIS Meters are not required. 




6. Flow Diagram
Assign an existing meter - Asset Managers




7. Application Stage
7.1 Association of Meter(s) to Assets or Locations
The asset manager associates the desired meter to the specific asset or location of interest in AMIS. (see: Appendix 1 - Adding Meters to assets)
7.2 Create/Modify the Job Plan.
The asset manager reviews the relevant Job Plan and PMs (or creates new JPs and PMs if required) to include the detailed tasks necessary for the completion of inspection/assessment activities by the technicians and the determination of condition as required. 
The desired meter is also associated to the specific Job plan task as created by the asset manager. (This in addition to being associated at the Asset level – this enables the system to cross-reference the data and gives the meter reading somewhere to ‘live’ in the system)
When the PM work orders are generated and completed, observed condition is captured as data within these tasks in alignment to a defined scale, instrument reading or other applicable standard for that asset class.
Referencing a meter on a JP task

Selecting a Meter on the JP Task. 
This is only useful if there is a condition monitoring point established. If not then this meter selected on the JP Task will not appear. 




7.3 Review of PM
The PM is reviewed by the asset manager to ensure that work orders will be generated for the specific assets or locations of interest at the desired frequency and starting date, along with duration of the inspection program. 
Detail of the Job Plan tasks and any data collection requirements is communicated and agreed with the relevant Service provider tasked with undertaking the work. Where use of a metering ‘bulk load’ template is required, the asset manager provides the template to the delivery team. 
Once established, this forms the logistical basis of the Condition and Performance monitoring program for that group of assets/locations. With all the required detail and engagement complete, the asset manager can activate the PM.
8. Background
8.1 Creating new meters versus assigning existing meters to assets
An expanding collection of condition meters exist within the AMIS environment. These are available for immediate use and Asset managers have sufficient system access to directly assign them to assets as required.
As they are part of the master data set within AMIS and therefore need to be both consistent and standardised, Asset managers do not have system access rights to create new meters. Asset managers do have the rights to assign existing meters in the system against assets and locations as required. Requests for new meters need to be documented and forwarded to the AMS team via a call to IT Support.
If your condition monitoring requirements dictate a new meter is needed, please refer to CORP_AM_WI_Creating New Condition Meters on Assets or Locations. 
8.2 Meter Groups
To simplify the asset creation process, the concept of condition meter groups has been implemented whereby a logical grouping of condition meters can be applied to assets at a classification level.
The determination of which meters are contained within groups targeting any given asset classification is at the discretion of the relevant CoP (Community of Practice).
Meter groups can be modified beyond the initial deployment should additional meters be required across the entire classification. Creation or modification of meter groups is the responsibility of the relevant CoP
For ad-hoc or asset specific metering requirements, additional meters can be assigned alongside the meter group(s) already assigned.
9. Definitions 
Reference
Definition
Meters
Are the functional repositories within AMIS where condition related data are captured and stored for reporting and analytical purposes as well as to support the automated or semi-automated initiation of corrective activities via associated Condition monitoring points.
Meters appear in the system as a pre-defined set of fields associated with an asset or location. The determination and collection of meter data for a specific asset is a function of the Job Plan(s) previously defined and associated with the specific asset. 
Meter data is captured and loaded into the system from individual inspection tasks and PM work orders as defined in the relevant Job Plans.

Condition Monitoring points (CMP)
Are the pre-defined business rules that are associated within AMIS with a specific meter and asset/location. 
CMPs are created by the Asset Manager and applied against meters.
CMPs can determine and initiate an automated response (e.g. Notification to responsible party or generation of a Service Request) in direct response to data entered into a meter from a completed PM Work order.
CMPs typically feature definable upper and lower limits as the means for triggering a system response.
Where condition data is being collected and retained for reporting purposes only, no condition monitoring points are required. 
Where an automated or semi-automated response is required from a PM work order inspection, a suitable condition monitoring point must have been defined and associated with the meter. 

Domains
The contents of pre-defined ‘drop down’ lists and selection menus as contained within AMIS in the form of ‘Domains’
Measurement point
When a task with a meter is added to a job plan, the subsequent work orders and tasks will have the associated CMP shown as a Measurement Point in the system.
Measurement Value
The data value entered into the system from an inspection task completed under a specific work order.
Measurement date
The date corresponding to the inspection task completed under a specific work order.

10. References
Standards and Related Documents
CORP AM WI Con Mon Creating New Condition Meters on Assets or Locations




Appendix 1 - Adding Meters to assets
Adding meters to Assets and Locations
Note that the example below is for assets. The same process is used for adding meters to Locations.
Use the Assets application to associate multiple meters to an asset. If the selected asset is associated with a meter group, the meters in that group display in the Meters window on the Meters tab.
Procedure
1. In the Assets application, display the asset to which you want to add a meter.
– Go To >> Assets >> Assets (HSE)

2. On the Meters tab, click New Row. If a value appears in the Meter Group field and there are meters in that meter group, those meters display in the Meters window.

3. In the Meter field, specify a meter. By default the meter is Active. 

4. If you select a continuous type of meter, specify one of the following options for the Average Calculation Method: 
All : To use all the readings to calculate the average of the readings.
Sliding Days : To use a specific number of days to calculate the average of the readings. If you specify Sliding, type a value in the Sliding Window Size field for the number of days to use in the calculation.
Sliding Readings : To use a specific number of readings to calculate the average of the readings. If you specify Sliding, type a value in the Sliding Window Size field for the number of readings to use in the calculation.
Static : To set the average reading and never recalculate it. If you specify Static, type a value in the Average Units/Day field.
• 
5. For a continuous type of meter, in the Reading Type field, specify Delta (to report incremental use) or Actual (to report cumulative use).

6. For a continuous type of meter, in the Accept Rolldown From field, specify Asset (for the readings of the parent asset to apply to the current asset), Location (for the readings of the location to apply to the current asset), or None.

7. If the asset is a linear asset, such as a roadway or a pipeline, specify values in the Linear Segment Details section as needed. 

8. Click Save Asset.
Notes on other meter types:
For a Gauge meter, users can define the Minimum and Maximum (normal) Operating Range as well as the Target Value. These values do not drive any system behavior but do appear when graphing the meters using the Maximo report. (see reporting meters in the How To Add A Meter Reading guide)

For a Characteristic meter, no other information is required to be added.

















11. Document History 
Date
Reviewed/
Actioned By
Version
Action
16/3/2017
Frank Courtney
1
Reviewed Draft
7/8/2017
Frank Courtney
2
Reviewed and updated template
29/06/2018
Elisa Bourke
3
Added to Inflo
Updated doc id and version number




Assigning Meters to Assets and Locations in AMIS
Work Instruction





Doc ID: 42689485
Page 9 of 11
Version: 3
Date: 09/2020
Doc Name: AM WI Assigning Meters to Assets and Locations in AMIS
Author: COntinuous Improvement Practitoner
Approver: ASGI Team Lead
Document uncontrolled if printed








Assigning Meters to Assets and Locations in AMIS
Work Instruction





Doc ID: 42689485
Page 11 of 11
Version: 3
Date: 09/2020
Doc Name: AM WI Assigning Meters to Assets and Locations in AMIS
Author: COntinuous Improvement Practitoner
Approver: ASGI Team Lead
Document uncontrolled if printed


Con Mon Creating New Condition Meters on Assets or Locations

Table of Contents
1.	Purpose	1
2.	Scope	1
3.	Use of Meters for recording Condition and Performance information in AMIS.	1
4.	When do I use a Meter?	1
5.	When don’t I use a Meter?	2
6.	Flow Diagram	3
6.1	New Meter Definition and Application - Asset Managers	3
6.2	Stage 2 New Meter Creation - AMS team	4
7.	Instruction - Procedure for Creation of New Meters	5
7.1	Overview	5
8.	Definition Stage	5
8.1	Requirement for New Asset Condition Meter	5
8.2	Types of Meters	5
8.3	Defining the Meter	6
8.4	Naming Convention for Meters	7
8.5	Defining Reporting Requirements	7
9.	Handover to New Meter Creation Stage	7
10.	New Meter Creation Stage – AMS team	8
10.1	Receipt and Review	8
10.2	Review Against Existing Configuration	8
10.3	Build and Deploy	8
11.	Application Stage – Asset Managers	9
11.1	Create/review the Job Plan	9
11.2	Review of PM	10
11.3	Engagement with Delivery Teams	10
11.4	Apply Condition Monitoring (If Required)	10
12.	Background	10
12.1	Creating new meters versus assigning existing meters to assets	10
12.2	Meter Groups	10
13.	Definitions	11
14.	References	12
Appendix 1: Adding Meters to Assets	13
15.	Document History 	17

1. Purpose
The purpose of this procedure is to inform and support asset managers and other associated roles in the creation of asset condition monitoring records in the Asset Management Information System (AMIS).
This procedure will outline the general process, roles, responsibilities and workflow for creation of new asset condition and performance meters in AMIS. 
2. Scope
This document relates to the implementation of asset condition and performance monitoring records (i.e. Meters) in the AMIS environment. The procedure contained within this document is to be followed by asset managers and other associated roles when a new meter is deemed to be required for assignment assigned to an asset or location.
In the context of this specific Work Instruction, asset managers work with the Asset Management Systems team to identify and define the requirements for new condition and performance meters in AMIS. 
3. Use of Meters for recording Condition and Performance information in AMIS.
AMIS provides asset managers with the means to systematically deliver condition and performance measurement and monitoring of assets and locations. This information can be used to satisfy regulatory reporting commitments, drive pro-active maintenance programs and provide the raw data necessary to inform strategic analysis and trending of change in condition and performance of assets over time.
In the AMIS environment, Meters are simply pre-defined database fields which can be associated with objects in the system to provide logical repositories for information capture and retention.
Asset managers utilise meters by associating them in AMIS with selected assets/locations of interest and also the job plan tasks within the PMs which instruct the service provider to take observational action and record their findings.
4. When Do I Use a Meter?
Meter information is captured via Work order tasks and can be used for reporting and analysis purposes or in conjunction with a condition monitoring point to initiate corrective or preventative maintenance. 
Where meters are used to capture data for reporting purposes only, they are intended to satisfy associated business needs such as regulatory compliance and the provision of data to external stakeholders.
Meter data can originate from a variety of activities and sources:
• Inspection PM programs (e.g. Drain CCTV inspection)
• Prior Work order
• Performance parameter from Lab data, SCADA or PCS7 (e.g. flow rate)
• Status parameter from SCADA or PCS7 (e.g. Run hours)
• NDT monitoring (e.g. Vibration analysis)
Meter data can be entered into AMIS via the following channels:
• Direct entry via the Desktop application
• Direct entry via the mobile ‘Works Execution’ app on iPads
• Bulk upload using a spreadsheet template
5. When Don’t I Use a Meter?
Meters are only used to capture data which directly correlates to a need for corrective/preventative action or corporate reporting requirements. 
Meters are not used to capture data that is otherwise irrelevant to condition, performance or corporate reporting e.g. Work order feedback codes, Logs, PCR, reporting asset failure, etc. AMIS has specific applications and functions to cater to these data types.
If there is no business need to monitor, maintain or report condition of an asset or location, AMIS Meters are not required. 



6. Flow Diagram
6.1 New Meter Definition and Application - Asset Managers




6.2 Stage 2 New Meter Creation - AMS team



7. Instruction - Procedure for Creation of New Meters
7.1 Overview
The Meter creation procedure is split into three stages, Definition, Application and New Meter creation. The split is intended to reflect the differing teams involved and the knowledge/experience/accountabilities that are required to perform the tasks.
The definition stage involves the creation and documentation of the data requirements for asset condition metering, based upon the professional experience and working knowledge of asset managers. Asset management teams are accountable to the business in delivering effective and efficient maintenance, inspection and operational programs for their fleet.
The new meter creation stage involves the review and translation of data collection requirements (from the Definition stage) into new functional capability within the AMIS environment. The AMS team have the detailed knowledge and experience of AMIS to create and deploy system configurations that deliver the required functionality. AMS is accountable to the business in the delivery of asset system operations, reporting and data quality.
The application stage involves the assignation of meters and condition monitoring points in AMIS to assets and locations in the system. Asset managers perform this task directly in AMIS, using the meters, domains and reporting available in the system.
8. Definition Stage
8.1 Requirement for New Asset Condition Meter
A comprehensive library of meters exists and is maintained in the AMIS environment. If an appropriate meter cannot be found in the system, the asset manager will determine the need for a new meter to be created (or modification to an existing meter). This will be based upon a variety of factors including but not limited to:
• Manufacturer’s specifications.
• Design specifications.
• Major hazard facility licencing/HACCP.
• Asset management ‘Best Practice’
• Maintenance planning.
• Levels of service.
• Process criticality.
• Statutory reporting requirements.
8.2 Types of Meters
In the AMIS environment, there are 3 types of meters available:
• Characteristic
• Gauge
• Continuous
Characteristic meters can contain and record information relating to the state and condition of an asset (e.g. rating of external corrosion on a scale of 1-10, or degree of litter accumulation as an estimate of percentage full - LTPERCENTAGEFUL). For characteristic meters, a selection list is defined alongside the meter to suit the degree and extent of the condition being measured. 
Gauge meters are intended to contain and record directly measured readings from an asset obtained via direct observation, instrumentation or test equipment (e.g. Voltage or current readings, wall thickness, manual count or assessment of objects, vibration amplitude and frequency, levels and pressures). For gauge meters, a valid range of readings, along with acceptable upper/lower limits is usually defined alongside the meter.
Continuous meters are intended to contain and record information over time related to cumulative change in state of an asset (e.g. run hours, levels, meter readings). For continuous meters, a range of values whereby maintenance or other interventions may be required will be defined along with the meter. Population of continuous meters may potentially be automated in some cases via integration with SCADA or other corporate systems.
8.3 Defining the Meter
The asset manager will define in detail what inspection or monitoring activity is to occur and what data is to be recorded. The required data will largely dictate what type of meter should be chosen. 
This detail will vary across asset classes, may involve multiple service providers and collection frequencies. This information populates the Job Plan (activities) as well as the meter specification (data requirements).
Where standardised readings are desired, (quantitative/qualitative) the asset manager can define the range of acceptable responses. 
The asset manager also specifies the assets/locations/classifications that the new/modified meter should be applied to.
The determination of whether a meter should be applied to an Asset or Location is up to the asset manager. In the majority of cases the type of condition information desired will logically indicate the best fit for the meter. 
As an example, a meter for vibration will logically apply to the specific asset – whereas a meter for erosion along a waterway will more logically apply to the location. 
8.4 Naming Convention for Meters
The name chosen by the AM for a new meter should be concise and logical. AMIS provides a name field of up to 80 characters for this purpose along with a description field for further clarity. Some examples include:
Table 1: Naming convention and description
Meter Name
Meter Type
Description
DIVIRRMETERREADDATE
CHARACTERISTIC
Diversion Reading Existing Date
FLOODGATE_CONDITION
CHARACTERISTIC
Floodgate Condition Table
LTPERCENTAGEFUL
CHARACTERISTIC
Litter Trap Percentage Full
MOSQUITO_ADULT
GAUGE
Mosquitoes - Adult
MOSQUITO_LARVAE
GAUGE
Mosquito larvae
MOSRUNHOURS
CONTINUOUS
Mosaic Run Hours Meter
BOREPUMPMETERREDEX
CONTINUOUS
Bore Pump Meter Reading

8.5 Defining Reporting Requirements
1.4.1	Where Condition Meters are used to retain data for statutory reporting purposes, the asset manager will define what requirements exist for reporting of the stored data. (Reporting frequency, data range, level of detail, etc.).
1.4.2	There are a number of pre-existing reports in the system that may suffice for the specific requirement, alternatively a request to IT Support can be made for a bespoke report to be created.
9. Handover to New Meter Creation Stage
1.5.1	To initiate the creation stage of the new/modified meter, the asset manager will collate and attach all the information created in the definition stage in an email addressed to IT Support, requesting creation of new condition meter(s) in AMIS. The request will be forwarded to the AMS service desk queue.
1.5.2	This completes the Definition stage – the procedure now moves to the AMS team for the new meter creation stage.
10. New Meter Creation Stage – AMS team
10.1 Receipt and Review
The meter request is received into the AMS service desk queue.
The request is reviewed to ensure clear understanding of the data and functional requirement.
If needed, the AMS team member will contact and discuss the request with the requesting AM to verify and clarify understanding of the intent.
10.2 Review Against Existing Configuration
The meter request is reviewed against those meters, domains and associated configuration items that already exist within the AMIS environment. Where an existing meter and/or domains exists, the request is directed back to the Asset manager in preference to creation of any duplicate items. 
The desired outcome from the metering request is reviewed in terms of system configuration, meter types and association with the specified asset/location/classification. Where a procedurally simpler or more efficient approach is possible, the AMS team will make contact with the requesting AM to discuss the request and agree on the implementation approach.
Similarly, requirements for reporting output will be reviewed against existing reports and functionality in the system.
10.3 Build and Deploy
The AMS team will take the reviewed requirement and create the necessary meters and domains. Contact will be made with the requesting AM to verify that the delivered functionality meets expectation.
Once in the system, the new meter is available for the asset manager to associate with the specific assets/locations/classifications as necessary.
Where meter data is to be entered into AMIS via a bulk loading method, a suitable template spreadsheet is created and tested by AMS and provided to the AM for inclusion into the job plan and distribution to the service provider.
Where specific reports are required, the AMS team will create and test them, then implement into the system as required (e.g. as scheduled reports, ad-hoc or start centre).
Once deployed into AMIS, the AMS team hands over the new meter(s) and associated content to the asset manager who will proceed to assign the meter(s) to the relevant asset/location along with any condition monitoring points. From this point the creation stage is completed.
11. Application Stage – Asset Managers
3.1 Assignation of meter(s) to assets or locations
Once made available in the system, the asset manager assigns the desired meter to the specific asset or location of interest, see Appendix 1: Adding Meters to assets. 
11.1 Create/review the Job Plan
The asset manager reviews the relevant Job Plan and PMs (or creates new JPs and PMs if required) to include the detailed tasks necessary for the completion of inspection/assessment activities by the technicians and the determination of condition as required. Observed condition is captured as data within these tasks in alignment to a defined scale, instrument reading or other applicable standard for that asset class. 
The specification of assets and/or locations for inspection along with frequency and scheduling of inspection activity is determined and included in the PM.
Referencing a meter on a JP task

Selecting a Meter on the JP Task. 
This is only useful if there is a condition monitoring point established. If not then this meter selected on the JP Task will not appear. 

11.2 Review of PM
The PM is reviewed to ensure that the work orders are generated for the specific assets or locations of interest at the desired frequency and starting date, along with duration of the inspection program.
11.3 Engagement with Delivery Teams
The asset manager liaises with the delivery team(s) who will be tasked with carrying out the inspection work to inform them of the new inspection task(s) and data collection requirements.
Where use of a metering ‘bulk load’ template is required, the asset manager provides the template to the delivery team. 
Meter data can be entered into AMIS from the desktop application. The guide in appendix 2 demonstrates the process. A forthcoming mobile application for condition meter data entry will provide an alternative means of data entry.
11.4 Apply Condition Monitoring (If Required)
Where a need for notifications or ‘follow-on’ work orders from changes in condition is required, the asset manager applies a condition monitoring point to the newly applied meter at the specified asset or location. The response to a trigger from condition monitoring is set (e.g. notification to interested parties, auto-generate a Work Order, etc.). 
12. Background
12.1 Creating new meters versus assigning existing meters to assets
An expanding collection of condition meters exist within the AMIS environment. These are available for immediate use and Asset managers have sufficient system access to directly assign them to assets as required.
As they are part of the master data set within AMIS and therefore need to be both consistent and standardised, Asset managers do not have system access rights to create new meters. Asset managers do have the rights to assign existing meters in the system against assets and locations as required. Requests for new meters need to be documented and forwarded to the AMS team via a call to IT Support.
If your condition monitoring requirements dictate a new meter is needed, please refer to the associated document – AM WI Assigning Meters to Assets and Locations in AMIS.
12.2 Meter Groups
To simplify the asset creation process, the concept of condition meter groups has been implemented whereby a logical grouping of condition meters can be applied to assets at a classification level.
The determination of which meters are contained within groups targeting any given asset classification is at the discretion of the relevant CoP (Community of Practice).
Meter groups can be modified beyond the initial deployment should additional meters be required across the entire classification. Creation or modification of meter groups is the responsibility of the relevant CoP
For ad-hoc or asset specific metering requirements, additional meters can be assigned alongside the meter group(s) already assigned.
13. Definitions 
Reference
Definition
Meters
Are the functional repositories within AMIS where condition related data are captured and stored for reporting and analytical purposes as well as to support the automated or semi-automated initiation of corrective activities via associated Condition monitoring points?
Meters appear in the system as a pre-defined set of fields associated with an asset or location. The determination and collection of meter data for a specific asset is a function of the Job Plan(s) previously defined and associated with the specific asset. 
Meter data is captured and loaded into the system from individual inspection tasks and PM work orders as defined in the relevant Job Plans.

Condition Monitoring points (CMP)
Are the pre-defined business rules that are associated within AMIS with a specific meter and asset/location? 
CMPs are created by the Asset Manager and applied against meters.
CMPs can determine and initiate an automated response (e.g. Notification to responsible party or generation of a Service Request) in direct response to data entered into a meter from a completed PM Work order.
CMPs typically feature definable upper and lower limits as the means for triggering a system response.
Where condition data is being collected and retained for reporting purposes only, no condition monitoring points are required. 
Where an automated or semi-automated response is required from a PM work order inspection, a suitable condition monitoring point must have been defined and associated with the meter. 

Domains
The contents of pre-defined ‘drop down’ lists and selection menus as contained within AMIS in the form of ‘Domains’
Measurement point
When a task with a meter is added to a job plan, the subsequent work orders and tasks will have the associated CMP shown as a Measurement Point in the system.
Measurement Value
The data value entered into the system from an inspection task completed under a specific work order.
Measurement date
The date corresponding to the inspection task completed under a specific work order.
14. References
Standards and Related Documents
AM WI Assigning Meters to Assets and Locations in AMIS



Appendix 1: Adding Meters to Assets
Adding meters to Assets and Locations
Note that the example below is for assets. The same process is used for adding meters to Locations.
Use the Assets application to associate multiple meters to an asset. If the selected asset is associated with a meter group, the meters in that group display in the Meters window on the Meters tab.
Procedure
1. In the Assets application, display the asset to which you want to add a meter.
– Go To >> Assets >> Assets (HSE)

2. On the Meters tab, click New Row. If a value appears in the Meter Group field and there are meters in that meter group, those meters display in the Meters window.

3. In the Meter field, specify a meter. By default the meter is Active. 

4. If you select a continuous type of meter, specify one of the following options for the Average Calculation Method: 
All: To use all the readings to calculate the average of the readings.
Sliding Days : To use a specific number of days to calculate the average of the readings. If you specify Sliding, type a value in the Sliding Window Size field for the number of days to use in the calculation.
Sliding Readings: To use a specific number of readings to calculate the average of the readings. If you specify Sliding, type a value in the Sliding Window Size field for the number of readings to use in the calculation.
Static: To set the average reading and never recalculate it. If you specify Static, type a value in the Average Units/Day field.
• 
5. For a continuous type of meter, in the Reading Type field, specify Delta (to report incremental use) or Actual (to report cumulative use).

6. For a continuous type of meter, in the Accept Rolldown From field, specify Asset (for the readings of the parent asset to apply to the current asset), Location (for the readings of the location to apply to the current asset), or none.

7. If the asset is a linear asset, such as a roadway or a pipeline, specify values in the Linear Segment Details section as needed. 

8. Click Save Asset.
Notes on other meter types:
For a Gauge meter, users can define the Minimum and Maximum (normal) Operating Range as well as the Target Value. These values do not drive any system behaviour but do appear when graphing the meters using the Maximo report. (See reporting meters in the How To Add A Meter Reading guide)

For a Characteristic meter, no other information is required to be added.















15. Document History 
Date
Reviewed/ Actioned By
Version
Action
16/3/2017
Frank Courtney
1.0
Reviewed Draft
7/8/2017
Frank Courtney
2
Reviewed and updated template
30/11/2018
Frank Courtney
3
Reviewed. No changes




Con Mon Creating New Condition Meters on Assets or Locations
Work Instruction





Doc ID: 42689214
Page 15 of 17
Version: 4
Date: 09/2020
Doc Name: AM WI Con Mon Creating New Condition Meters on Assets
Author: Continuous Improvement Practitoner
Approver: ASGI Team Lead
Document uncontrolled if printed








Con Mon Creating New Condition Meters on Assets or Locations
Work Instruction





Doc ID: 42689214
Page 17 of 17
Version: 4
Date: 09/2020
Doc Name: AM WI Con Mon Creating New Condition Meters on Assets
Author: Continuous Improvement Practitoner
Approver: ASGI Team Lead
Document uncontrolled if printed






Con Mon Entering Meter Data in the Works Execution App

1. Purpose
The purpose of this procedure is to inform and support field maintenance teams and other associated roles in the collection and entry of condition information as Meters in the Works Execution App.
This procedure will outline the process and steps in the app to enter a meter entry as specified by a task in the Work order. 
2. Scope
This document relates to the implementation of asset condition monitoring records (i.e. Meters) in the AMIS environment. The procedure contained within this document is to be followed when data is required to be collected and entered as a meter against a task.
3. Use of Meters for recording Condition and Performance information in AMIS
AMIS provides Melbourne Water with the means to systematically deliver condition and performance measurement and monitoring of assets and locations. This information can be used to satisfy regulatory reporting commitments, drive pro-active maintenance programs and provide the raw data necessary to inform strategic analysis and trending of change in condition and performance of assets over time.
The collection of data is now supported by the use of Meters which are associated to Tasks in the Work order. The Works Execution app now supports meter data entry directly from the work order. 
4. When do I fill in a Meter?
The requirement for data collection to occur is setup through the use of Job plans in AMIS. Within a Job Plan, Tasks are created to request that a check or inspection is done. A Meter is associated with the specific task to contain the observed data.
When the PM is made active, it generates Work Orders which contain the relevant Tasks and Meter fields.
Currently, the Work Order Details Report contains information on tasks or child work orders which have Meters associated with them.  
5. How do I enter information into a Meter?
There are three types of Meters in the system which are used for condition monitoring.
• Gauge
• Continuous
• Characteristic
Gauge meters contain simple numeric values that reflect the state of the asset or the observation at the time (e.g. 10, 500, and 12.356).
Continuous meters record a cumulative value that increases over time (e.g. Run Hours, Odometer, etc.).
Characteristic meters record a value from a pre-defined ‘drop down’ list that is setup along with the meter and the job plan task (e.g. Low/Mid/High, Poor/Fair/Good/New, 25%/50%/75%/100%). 
To enter a meter value for a work order task, the User:
1. Logs into the Works Order app and selects the relevant Work Order from the Schedule,
2. Tap on the ‘Tasks to Do’ header to reveal WO Tasks and any Meters,
3. Tap on the Meter icon in the task list to bring up the data entry Popup,
4. Enter the Data as required for that Meter (drop down list or direct entry).
The following screenshots demonstrate the process.



5.1 Log in to Work Orders and select the relevant WO record
Find and tap the relevant Work Order from your assigned list





5.2 Tap on the ‘Tasks to Do’ header to bring up the Task list and any Meters 


5.3 Tap the Meter Icon on the Task list
Any Tasks with Meters associated will have a blue counter icon next to them. Tap the icon to reveal the Meter entry popup.





5.4 Enter the Data as required
Enter the Data, along with any comment you wish to include.
Depending on the Meter type, this could be a drop down menu selection or direct text entry.




5.5 Tap ‘Done’ to return to your Work Order record
The app will save the data and log the date and time.




Please note that Continuous meters will compare your new meter reading as entered with the last known value. The system expects that any new reading is higher than the last known value.
If the new reading is less than the last reading, the app will present an error.
There is no checking or comparison of data for Gauge meter readings.
Once the Meter data is entered as per the Task list, complete the Work Order as per the usual process.


6. Definitions 
Reference
Definition
Meters
Are the functional repositories within AMIS where condition related data are captured and stored for reporting and analytical purposes as well as to support the automated or semi-automated initiation of corrective activities via associated Condition monitoring points?
Meters appear in the system as a pre-defined set of fields associated with an asset or location. The determination and collection of meter data for a specific asset is a function of the Job Plan(s) previously defined and associated with the specific asset. 
Meter data is captured and loaded into the system from individual inspection tasks and PM work orders as defined in the relevant Job Plans.

Condition Monitoring points (CMP)
Are the pre-defined business rules that are associated within AMIS with a specific meter and asset/location? 
CMPs are created by the Asset Manager and applied against meters.
CMPs can determine and initiate an automated response (e.g. Notification to responsible party or generation of a Service Request) in direct response to data entered into a meter from a completed PM Work order.
CMPs typically feature definable upper and lower limits as the means for triggering a system response.
Where condition data is being collected and retained for reporting purposes only, no condition monitoring points are required.  
Where an automated or semi-automated response is required from a PM work order inspection, a suitable condition monitoring point must have been defined and associated with the meter.  

Domains
The contents of pre-defined ‘drop down’ lists and selection menus as contained within AMIS in the form of ‘Domains’
Measurement point
When a task with a meter is added to a job plan, the subsequent work orders and tasks will have the associated CMP shown as a Measurement Point in the system.
Measurement Value
The data value entered into the system from an inspection task completed under a specific work order.
Measurement date
The date corresponding to the inspection task completed under a specific work order.

7. References
Standards and Related Documents
CORP_AM_WI_ Creating New Condition Meters on Assets or Locations













8. Document History 
Date
Reviewed/ Actioned By
Version
Action
27/11/2017
Frank Courtney
1
Reviewed Draft
29/06/2018
Elisa Bourke
2
Added to Controlled library
Updated version number and Doc ID




Con Mon Entering Meter Data in the Works Execution App
Work Instruction





Doc ID: 42689491
Page 10 of 12
Version: 3
Date: 09/2020
Doc Name: AM WI Con Mon Entering Meter Data in the Works Executio
Author: Continuous Improvement Practitioner
Approver: ASGI Team Lead
Document uncontrolled if printed








Con Mon Entering Meter Data in the Works Execution App
Work Instruction





Doc ID: 42689491
Page 12 of 12
Version: 3
Date: 09/2020
Doc Name: AM WI Con Mon Entering Meter Data in the Works Executio
Author: Continuous Improvement Practitioner
Approver: ASGI Team Lead
Document uncontrolled if printed






Developer Works Handover Stage 2 Handover Instruction

1. Purpose
The purpose of this procedure is to document the Stage 2 - Practical Completion Documetation & Finalisation process in order to update EPMS, GIS and Maximo records.
2. Scope
This document relates to waterways works built by developers that are managed via Melbourne Water’s Development Services Team.
3. Procedure
Practical Completion Documentation and Finalisation is undertaken after Practical Completion (Stage 1) and requires the completion of a Stage 2 Handover Certificate. Stage 2 Certification is acceptance that assets satisfy the requirements for completion of the project to a standard needed for on-going maintenance and operation.
This stage facilitates the Final Cost Reporting and Asset Capitalisation process (FCR), as well as the capturing or updating of asset information within our corporate data systems (EPMS, GIS & Maximo). With the issuing of a Stage 2 Handover Certificate, waterways assets become Melbourne Water's to own and maintain. Prior to Stage 2 they remain the responsibility of the developer during a defects liability period.
3.1 Notification of a Stage 2 Handover
When a Stage 2 Handover Certificate has been finalised, an automated email will be sent to either the EPMS Plan Room email address or to an individual member’s inbox from noreply@melbournewater.com.au. The email will be titled “Project Approval or Review required (Maximo)”, and should mention the term “Stage 2 Handover” in the body of the email.
• The email will include a clickable link to the Maximo project record called Project Review/Approval.
3.2 Extracting the Stage 2 Handover Certificate
Clicking on the Maximo project link in the email should open the Maximo project record with the “Review and Endorse” tab open by default. Click on the paperclip icon beneath the word “Attachments” and select “View Attachments” from the menu. 

One of the attached documents (actually links to documents elsewhere in Inflo) should be the Stage 2 certificate. Click on the link under the “Document” column to view the certificate document in Inflo, where you can download a copy to a temporary staging area of your choice.
There can be two types of Stage 2 Handover Certificate; one for civil works, and another for planting works. The Stage 2 Handover notification could be for either one, or potentially for both combined.
Once the handover document has been successfully downloaded, exit the attachment screen by clicking “OK” to return to the project record. Check the box next to your name in the “Endorsed?” column and save the project record.
3.3 Drawing Load Workflow Spreadsheet
The Drawing Load Workflow spreadsheet is located on M: drive at
M:\MEL\Info Systems\Information Maintenance\EPMS
Fill in the details of the Stage 2 Handover in the ‘MW (Stage 2) Handover’ worksheet. The initial fields to populate are as follows.
Drainage Section
the EPMS folder number, e.g. 0101/01
Section Name
the name of the section, e.g. Example Drain section 1
Project Number
actually the budget number, e.g. Q123456
Date Handed to MW
the final completion date in the MS Word document
Date Received
the date the Stage 2 Handover email arrived
3.4 Uploading the Handover Certificate to EPMS
Navigate to the relevant EPMS Waterways & Drainage folder and add an Asset Plan Document.

Navigate to the Stage 2 Handover Certificate MS Word document you downloaded earlier, and add it to the EPMS folder as plan 000 as per the following examples:
0101/01/000 Stage 2 (MW) Handover Certificate
 If there is an existing plan 000, add an additional character to the plan number. 
0101/01/000a Stage 2 (MW) Handover Certificate
If there are two separate Stage 2 Handover Certificates (Civil & Planting), add them as follows.
0101/01/000a Stage 2 (MW) Handover Certificate – Civil
0101/01/000b Stage 2 (MW) Handover Certificate - Planting
3.5 Updating GIS Records
Asset records for the EPMS section in the Stage 2 Handover should already exist in the GIS, having been captured as part of the Stage 1 As Constructed plan submission. Their ownership should have previously been captured as PVT (Private), while their service status values should have been WIP (Work in Progress). They will need to be updated to MW (Melbourne Water) and IN (In Service) respectively now that the Stage 2 handover has been finalised.
Search the relevant GIS tables for the EPMS section number mentioned in the Stage 2 Handover Certificate. The GIS field to query will be called EPMS_SEC_NO. The fields to update will be called ASSET_OWNER and SERVICE_STATUS.
Underground pipe assets could potentially involve the following GIS tables:
DR_Manhole
DR_Uground_Centreline
DR_Uground_Node
DR_Uground_Structure
Aboveground waterway assets could potentially involve the following GIS tables:
DR_Channel_Centreline
DR_Levee_and_Embankment
DR_Retarding_Basin
DR_Storm_Water_Quality_Systems
DR_Waterbodies
DR_Waterway_Node
DR_Waterway_Structure
3.6 Updating Maximo Records
Records that exist in Maximo for the EPMS section in the Stage 2 Handover should have previously been captured with ownership codes of PVT (Private) and with statuses of Planned. They will need to be updated to MW (Melbourne Water) and In Service respectively now that the Stage 2 handover has been finalised.
If records do not yet exist in Maximo for the EPMS section in the Stage 2 Handover, they should be bulk-uploaded with the afore-mentioned ownership and status codes.
3.7 Complete the Drawing Load Workflow Spreadsheet Entry
With the GIS, Maximo and EPMS updates having been completed, the following spreadsheet values can be populated.
GIS Updated
the date the GIS records were updated
MAXIMO Updated
the date the Maximo records were updated
EPMS Updated
the date the Stage 2 Handover Certificate was uploaded to EPMS
Completed By
the name of the person who completed the process
This represents the end of the Stage 2 - Practical Completion Documentation & Finalisation process.
4. Responsibilities
Role
Responsibility
Developer Works Project Officer
Initiate the Stage 2 Handover workflow
Data Officer – Waterways & Drainage
Process the Stage 2 Handover to update EPMS, GIS and Maximo
5. Definitions 
Reference
Definition
CMS
Capital Management System
EPMS
Electronic Plan Management System. Melbourne Water's digital plan management system.
FCR
Final Cost Reporting (& Asset Capitalisation)
GIS
Geographic Information System. A database system that links attribute information to spatial objects.
Inflo
Melbourne Water's Electronic Document & Records Management System (EDRMS)
Maximo
Melbourne Water's Asset Management Information System (AMIS)
6. References 
References
WLRD GUI Practical Completion and Handover Process Waterways & Stormwater Quality Projects
Electronic Plan Management System (EPMS)
Capital Management System (CMS)


7. Document History 
Date
Reviewed/
Actioned By
Version
Action
17/10/2017
Asset Data Lead
1
Document Creation
16/9/2019
Asset Data Lead
2
Updated to reflect new Maximo procedure
12/08/2020
Asset Data Lead
3
Minor corrections




Developer Works Handover Stage 2 Handover Instruction
Work Instruction





Doc ID: 41566872
Page 2 of 6
Version: 3
Date: 09/2020
Doc Name: AM WI Developer Works Handover Stage 2
Author: Asset Data Lead
Approver: CAM Data Officer
Document uncontrolled if printed






AMIS Amend Catalogue Item Work Instruction


Purpose
The purpose of this Work Instruction is to provide users the steps on how to amend an existing record within Maximo’s Item Master and Tools catalogue. 

Scope
This document relates to amending exiting records in Item Master and Tools catalogue.

Business Rules
1. Refer to CORP AM PRO Inventory Catalogue Procedure.
2. All active rotating items must have an item number that is suffixed with an “R”.
3. Data must be compliant with CORP AM STD Inventory_AMIS Catalogue Naming Standard.
4. Data must be compliant with CORP AM STD Inventory_AMIS Catalogue Standard Approved Abbreviations.
5. All catalogued items must have a Classification.
6. Catalogued item amendments must have a description that is reflective of the “Essential physical and performance characteristics” that aligns with usage requirement.
7. If a later model of a SSOS is released, then the later model will need to be created as a new item.

Prerequisite activities
An AMIS Catalogue Request form or the Multiple AMIS Catalogue Request Template has been completed.

Frequency
As needed.



Amend Rotating Item, Spare Part or Consumable

To
Go to
Amend an Item Description
Step 1
Add an Alternate Item
Step 5
Add a Vendor
Step 8
Add a Child to the Item Assembly Structure
Step 11
Delete an Alternate Item, Vendor or Child to the Item Assembly Structure line item
Step 14

Note:	Where the amendment to the item changes the items essential physical and performance characteristics, a new item record must be created. The old item may need to be changed to “Pending Obsolescence” if it is no longer needed.

Amend an Item Description
Step 
Action
1
Using the Go To menu in the navigation toolbar, select Inventory > Item Master(HSE)

2
Enter the Item number of the item you want to amend in the Find field and click  (Find).

3
a) Go to the Specifications Tab so that the correct naming conventions can be adopted in the Items Description field.

b) In the Specifications section of the screen, add any essential physical and performance characteristics as required.  In the example below, a value of ‘WATER INLET CLX’ has been added to attribute Design Type.



Note:	The data entered must comply with the CORP AM STD Inventory-AMIS_Catalogue Naming Standard and with CORP AM STD Inventory_AMIS Catalogue Standard Approved Abbreviations.

Note:	If the item is deemed a Single Source of Supply (SSOS), then the manufacturer and model/part number must also be included in the Item Description field, as this is reflective of the items essential requirements.

c) When your amendments are complete, click  to save the changes. 

Note:	The Item Description will auto update by concatenation of the attribute values entered.

4
a) Copy the short description into your clipboard.
b) Click  to open up the Long Description window.

c) Copy the updated short description into the Item Master Long Description. 

Note:	Manually populate the Item Master Long Description with unabbreviated and add any other information that may help others when searching for the item, including any colloquialisms.

d) Click OK.

e) Click  to save the changes made to the Description.


Add an Alternate Item
Step 
Action
5
Using the Go To menu in the navigation toolbar, select Inventory > Item Master 
6
Enter the Item number in the Find field and click  (Find).

7
a) From the Item tab, go to the Alternative Items section.

b) Click 

c) Enter the alternative item number into the Item field and tab.


d) Add as many alternate items as needed. 

e) When all additions are complete, click  to save changes.



Add a Vendor
Step 
Action
8
Using the Go To menu in the navigation toolbar, select Inventory > Item Master 
9
Enter the Item number in the Find field and click  (Find).

10
a) Go to the Vendors tab to add a new vendor to the Item Master.

b) Click 

c) To search for a vendor, click  (Chevron) to the right of the Vendor field, choose Select Value



d) Enter the vendors name in the Description field and press Enter.


e) Click on the underlined value to select the vendor


f) Add Manufacturer, Model and Manufacturer part numbers.



Note:	Items that are generic in nature may also have different manufacturers and/or models under the same or different vendors. This is ok as long as you have covered the essential physical and performance characteristics. 

g) Click  to save the changes.


Add a Child to the Item Assembly Structure
Step 
Action
11
Using the Go To menu in the navigation toolbar, select Inventory > Item Master.
12
Enter the Item number in the Find field and click  (Find).

13
a) Go to the Item Assemble Structure tab.
b) Click 

c) Add new items, quantities and remarks as needed.

d) Click  to save changes.



Delete an Alternate Item, Vendor or 
Child to the Item Assembly Structure line item
Step 
Action
14
a) To delete a line item, click  (located at the end of the row).
In this example, a Vendor line item.

Note:	A lines appears through the row after clicking the trash can.

b) Click  to delete the line entry.
 

End of Work Instruction.



Document Controls 
Role
Name
Author
Mick Sims
Reviewer
Warren Payne
Approver/ Owner
Stuart Smith


Document History
Date
Reviewed/ Actioned By
Version
Action
25 Aug 17
Nello Ragusa
0.1
Review Content
28 Aug 17
Stuart Smith
1.0

17 Sep 19
Warren Payne
1.1
Reviewed and updated


Amend AMIS Catalogue Item Work Instruction



Doc Name: CORP AM WI Inventory_AMIS Amend Catalogue Item
Author: Maintenance Optimisation Lead
Version: 1.1
Page 9 of 9
Approver: Team Leader, Asset Mgt Systems
Doc ID: 40163309
Document Uncontrolled if Printed
Approved: Sept 2019



AMIS Create Catalogue Item
Work Instruction


Purpose
The purpose of this Work Instruction is to provide users with the software steps for creating new Item Master records, or a new Tool records in Maximo.

Scope
This document supports the creation of database records that represent the catalogue of Item Master records, and the catalogue of Tool records within Maximo.

Business Rules
1. Refer to CORP AM PRO Inventory_AMIS Catalogue Procedure.
2. All active rotating items must have an item number that is suffixed with an “R”.
3. Data must be compliant with CORP AM STD Inventory_AMIS Catalogue Naming Standard.
4. Data must be compliant with CORP AM STD Inventory_AMIS Catalogue Standard Approved Abbreviations.
5. All catalogued items must have a Classification.
6. Catalogued items must have a description that is reflective of the “Essential physical and performance characteristics” that aligns with usage requirement.
7. If a later (newer) model of an item that is obtained from a Single Source of Supply (SSOS), the later model will need to be created as a new item.

Prerequisite activities
1. Understanding of definitions contained in CORP AM PRO Inventory_AMIS Catalogue Procedure.
2. Specific prerequisites are depicted as necessary within the sections of this work instruction.

Frequency
This process happens regularly within the business.




To
Go to
Create a Rotating Item, Spare Part or Consumable
Section 1
Create a Rotatable Tool or Generic Tool
Section 2

Section 1 - Create a Rotating Item, Spare Part or Consumable

Prerequisites:
• The item could not be found when searched for in the Item Master application.
• Undertaken the Oniqua Standards Dictionary (OSD) training course.  (refer to the MW AK&T Team)
• The Oniqua INC (5 digit number) has been identified using CORP AM WI Inventory_AMIS Search for Item in Item Master or a previously identified item which is similar.

Step 
Action
1
Navigate to the Item Master (HSE) application in Maximo to create the item record.  Inventory > Item Master (HSE) 
2
Select New Item icon.
3
Populate the following fields in the Item tab.

Note:	Complete the fields according to the information provided on the Catalogue Request Form or Catalogue Request Template.xls provided.

Note:	The mandatory fields are represented with * (an asterisk). The record cannot be saved unless all mandatory fields have been completed.

Field
Action
Item
The Item Number is an auto generated ID by Maximo.

For Rotating Items, amend the Item Number by adding “R” as a suffix, e.g. 997432R.
Note: This assists the Stores personnel with the identification of rotating items when undertaking stocktakes.
Description
Leave blank, this will be populated later.
Commodity Code
a) Enter the Oniqua INC. e.g. 05489 or F9025
b) Press Tab on your keyboard to exit field

Note: If the Commodity Code has been loaded in Maximo, the Commodity Group will auto populate.

Note: This code will also be used in the Specifications tab.

Note: If the Commodity Code does not exist in Maximo, contact AK&T for creation of the Commodity Code.
Lot Type
This field defaults to NOLOT.

Note: Only set to ‘LOT” for Consumables that have a shelf life and need to be identified by their batch number.
Order Unit
Enter “EA [space]” unless an alternate unit is required, e.g. ‘DRUM’, ‘BOX’, ‘SET’ etc.

Note: The Order Unit is a mandatory field in the Purchase Order, it is recommended that it be populated in the Item Master.
Issue Unit
Enter “EA [space]” unless an alternate unit is required, e.g. ‘DRUM’, ‘BOX’, ‘SET’ etc.

Note: The Issue Unit is a mandatory field in Inventory, it is recommended that it be populated in the Item Master.
Rotating?
If the record is for a Rotating Item, tick the checkbox to set item as rotating, otherwise leave unchecked.
Kit?
If the Consumable is a part of a Kit, tick the checkbox.

Note: An Item Assembly Structure (IAS) must be set before the item can be added to the Kit.  
Hint: You must first save the new Item Master record before setting an Item Assembly Structure.  
Note: A Kit should only be created if the components of the Kit are sometimes stored as separate items in a storeroom.  It is not obvious when looking at a child component of a kit that it belongs to a Kit (or multiple Kits). 
Capitalised?
If the record is for a Rotating Item, tick the checkbox, otherwise leave unchecked.

Note: All active items ticked as rotating must be capitalised.
Inspect on Receipt?
If the item requires an inspection upon receipt, tick the box. 

Note: All items ticked as rotating are to be inspected upon being received.
Add as Spare Part?
If the item is to be automatically associated as a ‘Spare Part’ to each asset that it gets issued to, tick the box. 
Mgt. Fee Applicable?
Defaulted as ticked.  Leave the checkbox ticked.

4
Go to the Specifications tab.
a) Click (Search) to the right of the Class Description field.
b) Enter the Commodity Code (i.e. INC) in the Classification.
c) Press Enter.
d) Click on the underlined value to select the classification.

Note:	The Classification field is auto populated against the Item Master record, the Class Description and the associated Attributes display. 

Note:	If the Classification does not exist in Maximo, contact AK&T for creation of the Classification Code.

Type INC into the Commodity Code field and press Tab on your keyboard


If the Commodity Code has been loaded, the Commodity Group and descriptions will auto populate.

5
Go to OSD to create the item name and description.  
6
Go to http://osd.oniqua.com   (For help on OSD access, contact AK&T Team)
7
a) Login using your access credentials.
b) Enter your User name and Password.
8
From the Home screen, hover over the ITEM tab and select Item Name Search.
9
Enter the identified INC.
10
Click directly on the Item Name hyperlink to display the item from the search results list 
11
Go to the Prompts tab to populate the Value fields with the essential physical and performance characteristics for the item.

Note:	The Prompts tab presents you with a template for recording the “essential physical and performance characteristics” of the item being described.



Note: Your description will concatenate in the lower windows. A character count also displays.

12
a) Click  to copy the description to the clipboard and a notification displays.

b) Click OK to accept the notification.



Note:	OSD retains what the information and will be available next time you open that INC.

13
Paste description from the clipboard directly into the Description field in Maximo. 
14
a) Click the Specifications tab to enter the attributes of the item, i.e. the essential physical and performance characteristics.

b) Copy the data entered in the Class Description field into the Short Name Attribute field.

Note:	In this example, the Classification has 20 associated attributes.

Note:	If the item is deemed a Single Source of Supply (SSOS), then the manufacturer and model/part number must also be included in the Item Description field, as this is reflective of the items essential requirements.

Note:	The description entered must comply with the CORP AM STD Inventory_AMIS Catalogue Naming Standard and with CORP AM STD Inventory_AMIS Catalogue Standard Approved Abbreviation.

c) Go through the remaining attributes and populate with essential physical and performance characteristics, e.g. Attribute Valve Dimension, value of 100MM, where required or known.

Note:	Do not populate the Unit of Measure field.

d) Click the Save icon to save the progress of the item creation.

Note:	The Item Description will auto populate by concatenation of the attribute values.

15
a) Open up the Long Description window.

b) Copy the existing description into the Item Master Long Description. 

Note:	Ensure to add the names unabbreviated and add any other information that may help others when searching for the item, including any colloquialisms.

c) Click OK.

d) Click the Save icon to save the progress of the item creation.
16
If the item is an asset, the item may need an Item Assembly Structure. If this is the case, go to the Item Assembly Structure tab.

a) Click New Row to add a new row.

b) Add Consumables and Spare Parts that are used on the Rotating Item, in the Children section of the screen, ensure to complete the Item and Quantity fields.

c) Add any child Items that form a part of the Rotating Item (Asset), in the Children section of the screen, ensure to complete the Item and Quantity fields and add any relevant remarks.
Note:	If the item is a Spare Part, do not populate any data in the Item Assembly Structure tab.

17
If the item is a Consumable and is part of a KIT (ie. where all kit items are stocked separately), populate the Item Assembly Structure tab.

a) Add all Consumables that make up the KIT and ensure the Kit? flag is checked on the Item tab

b) Add a remark to each child component item description. e.g. “used in Kit 123”  or “used in Kits 123, 997651”)

c) Click the Save icon to save the progress of the item creation.
18
Go to the Vendors tab.

a) Click New Row
b) Add Vendors, Manufacturers, Models and Manufacturer Part numbers, if known.
c) Click the Save icon to save the progress of the item creation.


19
To add an image of the item to the Item Master.

a) Go to Select Action and from the dropdown select Add/Modify Image.
a) Browse to the directory to select the image.


Note:	The maximum file size that can be added is 250KB.

b) Click OK.
The image is now visible in the Item tab as a thumbnail, (located in the top right hand corner).
20
Where documentation for the item is deemed to be required, e.g. OEM manuals, Workshop Manuals, Specification sheet it may be stored against the item master record.

a) Go to Item tab.
b) To attach a document to the item, click the Attachment icon in the top right corner.

c) Go to Attachments > Add New Attachments > Add New File 

Note:	Inflo is the repository for all required items related documentation, check there before attaching the required documentation. You can also add a document from the Inflo Library if it exists.

d) Click the dropdown arrow next to the Select a Folder field and select the appropriate option.
If attaching an image select Images, if attaching a diagram select Diagrams and if attaching any other documents such as manuals or specifications select Attachments.

e) Browse to the directory (file Location) to select the attachment.

f) Enter a short document name in the first field and a long description of the document in the second field. 

g) Uncheck the 3rd checkbox.

h) Click OK.

Note:	The Attachment icon has now changed to indicate that attachments are now available for viewing.
To view the attachment(s), go to Attachments > View Attachments.

21
Click the Save icon to save all changes made.
22
To allocate the item master to a specific store go to CORP AM WI Inventory_AMIS Associate Item to Store.

Section 2 - Create a Rotable Tool or Generic Tool

Prerequisites:
• Must know “Essential physical and performance characteristics” of the tool that aligns with its usage requirement.

Step 
Action	
1
Using the Go To menu in the navigation toolbar, select Inventory > Tools to create the tool.
2
Select  New Item in Common Actions menu.
3
Populate the following fields in the Tool tab.

Field
Action
Tool
The Tool Number is an auto generated ID by Maximo.
Commodity Code
Enter the Oniqua INC. e.g. 05489 or 5575A

Note: The Commodity Group field auto populates based on value entered in Commodity Code field.
Managed by
Enter the company responsible to manage the item, 
e.g. WG for Wood Group or WLD for Waterways and Land Development.
Tool Owner
Enter which company will own the Tool, e.g. MWC for Melbourne Water or enter the relevant service provider.
Issue Unit
Enter “EA [space]” unless an alternate unit is required, e.g. ‘SET’, ‘

Note: The Issue Unit is a mandatory field in Stocked Tools, it is recommended that it be populated in Tools.
Capitalised?
All tools default with this checkbox ticked.
Rotating?
If the record is for a Rotating Item, click the checkbox to set item as rotating, otherwise leave unchecked.

Note: For a tool or vehicle to be charged to a Work Order or to have maintenance performed on it, the tool must be defined as Rotating.
Inspect on Receipt?
If the record is for a Rotating Tool, click the checkbox.

If the record is for a Non-Rotating Tool, click the checkbox (if an inspection is required upon receipt), otherwise leave unchecked.

Note: All Rotating items are inspected upon being received.









Mgt Fee Applicable?
Leave the checkbox ticked.

4
Go to the Specifications tab.
a) Click the Chevron to the right of the Classification field.
b) Select Classify
c) Expand the Classification from the list until you identify the correct Tool classification.
d) Select the classification.
Note:	If an additional Tool Classification is required, raise an IT Service Request directed to Maximo support team.
e) In the Specification table populate the TOOLDESC attribute with an appropriate description that complies with CORP AM STD Inventory_AMIS Catalogue Naming Standard.

f) Populate the Manufacturer and Model attributes.

Note:	If the Tool is considered a Single Source of Supply (SSOS). The Tool Description will then include Manufacturer and Model.

g) Click the Save icon to save the progress of the tool creation.

Note:	The Tool Description will auto populate by concatenation of the provided attribute values. 

5
Go to the Vendors tab.

a) Click New Row

Add known manufacturers, models and manufacturer part numbers.
Note:	A manufacturer must be associated with a model and a manufacturer part number.

b) Click the Save icon to save the progress of the tool creation.
6
To add an image of the item to the Item Master.

a) Go to More Actions menu and select Add/Modify Image.

b) Browse to the directory of where you saved the image and select it.

Note:	The maximum file size that can be added is 250KB. 

c) On the main ‘Tool’ tab, click the thumbnail image to see its original size.

7
Where documentation for the Tool is deemed to be required, e.g. OEM manuals, Workshop Manuals, Specification sheet, they may be stored as an attachment against the Tool record.
a) Go to Tool tab.

b) To attach a document to the item, click  (Paper clip icon) in the top right corner.

c) Go to Attachments > Add New Attachments > Add New File 

Note:	Inflo is the repository for related documentation, check there before attaching the required documentation. You can also add a document from the Inflo Library if it exists.

d) Click the dropdown arrow next to the Select a Folder field and select the appropriate option.
If attaching an image select Images, if attaching a diagram select Diagrams and if attaching any other documents such as manuals or specifications select Attachments.

e) Browse to the directory (file Location) to select the attachment.

f) Enter a short document name in the first field and a long description of the document in the second field. 

g) Uncheck the 3rd checkbox. (ie: ensure the document does not print by default)

h) Click OK.

Note:	The Attachment icon has now changed indicating that attachments are now available for viewing.
To view the attachment(s), go to Attachments > View Attachments.

8
Click the Save icon to save all changes made.
9
To allocate the item master to a specific store go CORP AM WI Inventory_AMIS Associate Item to Store 


Document Controls 
Role
Name
Author
Mick Sims
Reviewer
Process Analyst – ASGI Team
Approver/ Owner
Team Leader – ASGI Team


Document History
[Only add details of previous two versions]
Date
Reviewed/ Actioned By
Version
Action
28 Aug 17
Stuart Smith
1.0

8 Dec 20
Warren Payne
1.1
Review and update content.  Remove out of date software images.

AMIS Create Catalogue Item Work Instruction



Doc Name: CORP AM WI Inventory_AMIS Create Catalogue Item
Author: Asset Governance & Improvement (ASGI) Team 
Version: 1.1
Page 9 of 15
Approver: Team Leader, ASGI
Doc ID: 40261296
Document Uncontrolled if Printed
Approved: Sept /2017


Move Asset from Repair Location to Store Work Instruction 


Purpose
The purpose of this Work Instruction is to provide users the steps on how to move an Asset’s location from a repair location to a store.

Scope
This document relates to changing an Asset’s Location from a repair location after the item has been overhauled, calibrated and/or certified, into a store so that it is ready for Issue.

Business Rules
Refer to CORP AM PRO_Inventory Overhaul

Prerequisite activities
• The Asset has a status of ‘OUT OF SERVICE’.
• The Asset has been successfully repaired, calibrated or certified as needed.
• The Asset’s Rotating Item Number is an Inventory Item within the store it is being moved into.

Frequency
As needed.




Move an Asset from Repair Location to Store

Step 
Action
1
Using the Go To menu in the navigation toolbar, select Assets > Assets (HSE).

2
a) Enter the Asset number into the Find field, e.g. 1000315 



a) Press Enter (or click ) to open the asset in the Asset tab.

Note:	If you are already in the work order, click  next to Asset field and select Go To Assets (HSE).


3
Click the Move/Modify Assets in the Common Actions menu. 






4
Click the  (Chevron) next to the To Location field and choose Select Value from the dropdown list. 

 

5
a) In the Select Value window, use the filters to search for the Storeroom.

b) Click on the appropriate stores repair location hyperlink to add the new location to the To Location field.




Note:	An Asset can only be moved to a storeroom if the Asset’s Rotating Item Number is listed as Inventory in that Store. Storerooms will not be available locations to select if the asset is not rotating.

6
a) Click OK to move the asset into the storeroom.

Note:	A system message to confirm the move displays.




b) Click OK to acknowledge the move.



Document Controls 
Role
Name
Author
Mick Sims
Reviewer
Nello Ragusa
Approver/ Owner



Document History
[Only add details of previous two versions]
Date
Reviewed/ Actioned By
Version
Action
18.10.17
Nello Ragusa
1.1
Reviewed and formatted doc
4.07.19
Warren Payne
1.2
Updated images to new Maximo version 7.6.01. Removed instruction for mass move of assets.

Move Asset from Repair Location to Store
Work Instruction



Doc Name: CORP AM WI Move Asset from Repair Location to Store
Author: Stores Improvement Project
Version: 1.2
Page 2 of 6
Approver: Team Leader, Asset Strategy
Doc ID: 40431911
Document Uncontrolled if Printed
Approved: Oct /2017



Move Asset to Designated Repair Location Work Instruction 


Purpose
The purpose of this Work Instruction is to provide users the steps on how to electronically move an Asset’s location to a repair location.

Scope
This document relates to changing an Asset’s location to a repair location so that the item can be overhauled, calibrated and/or certified.  This is to ensure Maximo reflects the current location of a rotating asset while being repaired.  

Business Rules
Refer to CORP AM PRO_Inventory Overhaul

Prerequisite activities
• A repair tag has been filled out and attached to the Asset
• The Asset has a status of ‘OUT OF SERVICE’.

Frequency
As needed.



To 
Go to
Move an Asset to a Designated Repair Location
Section 1

Section 1 - Move an Asset to a Designated Repair Location

Step 
Action
1
Using the Go To menu in the navigation toolbar, select Assets > Assets (HSE).


2
a) Enter the Asset number into the Find field, e.g. 1000315 

 

b) Press Enter (or click ) to open the asset in the Asset tab.

3
Go to the Common Actions sidebar menu and click Move/Modify Assets






Note:	The To Location field (on the right hand side of the pop up window) displays the current location details.



4
Click the  (Chevron) next to the To Location field and choose Select Value from the dropdown list.


5
a) In the Select Value window, type REPAIR into the Location field and press Enter. 

Note:	A list of all the possible repair locations displays.

b) Click on the appropriate stores repair location hyperlink to add the new location to the To Location field.



Note:	The To Location field populates with new selection.

6
a) Click OK to move the asset to the designated repair location.



Note:	A system message confirming the move displays.




b) Click OK to acknowledge the move.


Document Controls 
Role
Name
Author
Mick Sims
Reviewer
Nello Ragusa
Approver/ Owner



Document History
[Only add details of previous two versions]
Date
Reviewed/ Actioned By
Version
Action
17.10.17
Nello Ragusa
0.1
Reviewed and formatted doc
20.09.19
Warren Payne
1.1
Reviewed and Updated







Move Asset to Designated Repair Location
Work Instruction





Doc Name: CORP AM WI Move Asset to Designated Repair Location
Author: Maintenance Optimisation Lead
Version: 1.1
Page 2 of 7
Approver: Team Leader Asset Mgt Syst
Doc ID: 40087853
Document Uncontrolled if Printed
Approved: Sept 2019



AMIS Search for Item Master Record
Work Instruction


Purpose
The purpose of this Work Instruction is to provide users the steps on how to search for records within Maximo’s Item Master and Tools catalogue.

Scope
This document relates to searching for records in Item Master and Tools catalogue. 

Business Rules
Refer to CORP AM PRO Inventory_AMIS Catalogue Procedure

Prerequisite activities
Understanding of definitions contained in CORP AM PRO Inventory_AMIS Catalogue Procedure.

Frequency
As needed.



Search for Item Master Record

To 
Go to
Perform a Simple Search
Section 1
Perform an Advanced Search
Section 2
Search for an item name using Oniqua Standards Dictionary (OSD)
Section 3

Note: Wildcards and Operators
Wildcard characters and Operators are used to help search for when the entire value is unknown. 

Examples of how to use wildcard characters
Wildcard
Usage
Examples
* or %
Substitutes for a string of characters
Enter 123* or 123% to find records that start with 123, such as 123, 12345, and 123ABC.
Enter *123 or %123 to find records that end in 123, such as 123, 5123, and PUMP123.
Enter *123* or %123% to find records that contain 123, such as 123, 1234, PUMP123, or XX12300Valve.
? or _
Substitutes for a single character
Enter 123? or 123_ to find any four-character records that start with 123, such as 1234, 1230, 123g,
Enter _18 or ?18 to find any three-character records that end with 18, such as 418 or J18.
Note: These Wildcards are also applicable to text fields.

Operators used to define searches
Operators can be used in text fields (e.g. description fields) to help refine a search.
Operator
Operator action
Use
ampersand (&)
And
This will return a value with both search terms
e.g. PIPE & 500MM
equals (=)
Exact match
Find records that are an exact match to your search. 
e.g. =Active
~null~
Identifies Missing or unknown data in fields 
Use a null operator to search in a text field with no data. 
e.g. =~null~



Section 1 - Simple Search
Step 
Action
1
Using the Go To menu in the navigation toolbar, select Inventory > Item Master (HSE) to search for items.

…or 

Select Inventory > Tools to search for tools.

2
Simple searches can be conducted directly from the filter fields. 



3

a) Enter the item (a prominent noun) being searched into the Description field, 
e.g. “VALVE”

b) Press Enter to start the search.


Note:	In this example, there are 1,211 items that contain the search term of ‘Valve’. The system only displays 20 items at a time, you will need to press the green arrow pointing right  to scroll through the next 20 items.

Note:	If the list is more than 200 items long the system will only allow you to access the first 200. It is possible to download all records displayed into an Excel spreadsheet for filtering.

4
Alternatively, If the list returned is too long, you can further reduce the records returned by adding more detail to the description field, or by using another filter field.
For example, “Butterfly Valves” have their own commodity code. 

a) Click  next to Commodity Code field.

b) Enter ‘Butterfly’ into the Description field.

c)  Click OK.

d) Click on the underlined value to select the commodity.

e) Press Enter.



Note:	By adding additional information into the Description field, this further refines the search and returns fewer records.



5
If the item cannot be found using a Simple Search, go to Section 2 to perform an Advanced Search.


Section 2 - Advanced Search

Using the Advanced Search functionality allows you to filter on additional fields that are not available when using the simple search filters. 
The ability to search by Vendor, Manufacturer, Manufacturer Part No. and Vendor Part No. is useful for items that are SSOS.

Step 
Action
1
Using the Go To menu in the navigation toolbar, select Inventory > Item Master to search for items or select Inventory > Tools to search for tools.
2
Click Advanced Search to open the More Search Fields window.



Note:	The following fields are all searchable. To refine your search results returned enter values in multiple fields
Commonly used fields are; Item Description, Commodity Code, Vendor, Manufacturer, Manufacturer Part No. and Vendor Part No.


Note:	The Item Description only searches the short description, not the long description. 
3
Using Part Number (P/N) of 6ES7-195-7HB00-0XA0 as an example. 


There are a number of possibilities in how the catalogue item may have been created originally, e.g. 6ES7-195-7HB00-0XA0 or 6ES71957HB000XA0, or 6ES7 195 7HB00 0XA0.

a) Enter the Manufacturer Part no as it appear on the New Catalogue Request form, e.g. 6ES7-195-7HB00-0XA0

b) Click 

Note: If the part is not found a system message displays.  




Note: When using the Advanced Search function, the fields populated will be kept in the background even if you start using the filter fields for another search.
Ensure any Advanced Search fields are cleared before conducting another search. 
To clear fields, selectin the advanced search screen.

4
a) To broaden your possible search results returned, click  and only enter the first set of characters in the Manufacturer Part No. field, e.g. 6ES7


b) Click 



Note: In this example the search has returned records where the manufacturer part number begins with ‘6ES7’.

c) Open one of the items in the list then click the Vendors tab to check the Manufacturer Part Number. 



Note: You can scroll through the list using the green arrows to confirm the correct match.

6
If the item cannot be found using a Simple or Advanced Search, go to Section 3 to Search for the Item Name.


Section 3 – Oniqua Standards Dictionary (OSD)
(FOR MAXIMO DATA ADMIN USAGE ONLY)

Search for an Item Name
Step 
Action
1
Go to http://osd.oniqua.com 
2
a) Login using your access credentials.

b) Enter your User name and Password.

111443
From the Home screen, hover over the ITEM tab and select Item Name Search.


In the Item Name Code (INC) List, the selection of different search options can dramatically influence the search result, and the aim is to produce a result with an easily manageable size. If known, use INC from Oniqua Standards Dictionary.

4
Oniqua offers 3 options when searching for a name; Word, Contains and Starts With.



Word Search

A search using Word will only produce results that contain the whole word and will not find the search text within words, e.g. “MAT” returns all results with the word “MAT” in the description.




Contains Search

A search using Contains is the broadest search of the 3 options as it can search for the description (search text) containing the full word as well as the search text within words, e.g. “MAT” returns “ABRASIVE MAT” and “ABSORBENT MATERIAL”. All have the term contained within the description.



If you want to use more than one word in the search, use this option.


Note: Only use more than one word in the same search for a single item description, e.g. Mat floor. 
Do not use Mat and Carpet in the same search as it will return no matching results. Search for Mat and gather those results, then do a new search for Carpet.


Starts With Search

A search using Starts With will find all Item Names where the search text is at the start of the Item Name. It can return both whole words and the search text within a word, as long as the text is at the beginning of that word, e.g. “MAT” returns MAT,PLACE and MATCH,SAFETY. 


Note: A Starts With search is helpful if the Cataloguer knows the item well enough to understand its likely name.

5
a) Click the drop down arrow next to the Name field and select the preferred method of search, e.g. Contains 

b) Enter the search text into the search field, e.g. Absorb.

Note: Industry preferred practice for cataloguing is Reversed Nomenclature, meaning Noun or Noun Phrase first in an item’s catalogued Description. Understanding the Noun of an item will assist in finding the Approved Item Name.

The Noun of an item is not always obvious. You may receive a request to add a ‘Fire Extinguisher Dry Chemical, 2.5 kg’ to the catalogue
So what is this item? Is it a Fire Extinguisher that uses Dry Chemicals type, or is it the Dry Chemical that is used to refill Fire Extinguishers?

Therefore the Approved Item Name can either be EXTINGUISHER,FIRE or DRY CHEMICAL,FIRE EXTINGUISHER.
* It is important to understand the item being catalogued. If necessary, go back to the requester for clarification.

Note:	There is no ‘wildcard’ search functionality in OSD.



c) Tick the Include Cross Reference check box to produce a wider search.

Note: This option is generally used for Word and Contains searches. 
A Starts With search reflects that the Cataloguer understands that the search term forms at least the first part of the first word in the Approved Item Name. Therefore selecting Include Cross Reference is not necessary.

d) Click Search.


Note: The number of search results is displayed at the top of the list. The list of Item Names is displayed in alphabetical order.

6
Click directly on the Item Name hyperlink to display the item from the search results list 


Note: To select multiple items, tick the checkboxes to the left of the Item Name Code and click Display Selected Names located at the bottom right of the screen.



Note: Clicking the top checkbox next to Item Name Code heading will select all items in the list.

7
Check the Item Name to see if it is a match

a) Read the Definition to make sure it fits the Item to be catalogued.
Make careful note of what is excluded from the Item Name. In this example SWEEPING COMPOUNDS are an Item Name in their own right and should not be put into this description even though their function is similar. 
b) Check the image if one is available. 


c) Click the Cross Reference tab to check for any Cross References.


Note: Every Item Name record has an associated Cross Reference tab that may contain references, such as Colloquialisms, Brand Names, Acronyms, Generic Terms, and so on (in lower case), and/or, other similar / associated Approved Item Names (in upper case). 
This is where the Include Cross Reference checkbox in step 5 is searching if it was ticked.

For example in this Cross Reference list, oilzorb and supadri are Brand names, while SWEEPING COMPOUND is a different Item Name that is related to Absorbent material for oil and water.

8
a) Keep checking possibilities until you are sure of the Item Name you have chosen, and other possibilities have been deemed as not suitable.

b) If you have chosen multiple Item Names to look at (in step 7), you can navigate to the next Item Name using Next button at the bottom, or use the Back To List button to go back to the list to check other options and to start a new search.

9
To create the catalogue item go to CORP AM WI Inventory_AMIS Create Catalogue Item.



Document Controls 
Role
Name
Author
Mick Sims
Reviewer
Warren Payne
Approver/ Owner
Stuart Smith


Document History
[Only add details of previous two versions]
Date
Reviewed/ Actioned By
Version
Action
25 Aug 17
Nello Ragusa
0.1
Review Content
28 Aug 17
Stuart Smith
1.0

17 Sep 19
Warren Payne
1.1
Reviewed and Updated




AMIS Search for Item Master Record Work Instruction





Doc Name: CORP AM WI Inventory_AMIS Search for Item Master Record
Reviewer: Maintenance Optimisation Lead 
Version: 1.1 (Inflo version 6)
Page 17 of 18
Approver: Team Leader, Asset Systems & Reporting
Doc ID: 40257132
Document Uncontrolled if Printed
Approved: Sept 2019




Update Asset with Rotating Item Number Work Instruction


Purpose
The purpose of this Work Instruction is to provide users the steps on how to update an Asset’s rotating item number.

Scope
This document relates to updating/changing an Asset’s Rotating Item number.
Associating an asset for creating an association between an Item number and Asset for the purposes of uniquely tracking a rotating asset.

Business Rules
• Refer to CORP AM PRO_Inventory_Overhaul
• Refer to CORP AM PRO_Inventory_Catalogue
• All Asset names should be approved by an Asset Manager

Prerequisite activities
• The Asset has been identified as needing to be ‘Rotable’
• The Rotating Item Master record has already been added into Maximo

Frequency
As needed.
	


Update Asset with Rotating Item Number

Step 
Action
1
1. Using the Go To menu in the navigation toolbar, select Assets > Assets (HSE).

2
a) Enter the Asset number into the Find field, e.g. 1000315 


b) Press Enter (or click ) to open the Asset in the Asset tab.

3
Go to More Actions > Change Item Number to open the Change Item Number window.
 
4
Enter the Item Number in the New Item field and click OK to update the Rotable Item number. 
IMPORTANT NOTE:	
Upon associating a new rotating item to an asset, Maximo will automatically overwrite the current short description of the Asset with the description of the new item number.


 


Note: Only Items that have the Rotating Item box ticked can be selected for appointing with Assets.





Document Controls 
Role
Name
Author
Michael Sims
Reviewer
Dale Passmore
Approver/ Owner



Document History
[Only add details of previous two versions]
Date
Reviewed/ Actioned By
Version
Action
Oct 2017
Nello Ragusa
0.1
Reviewed and formatted doc
Sep 2019
Warren Payne
12 (Inflo)
Updated document with new screen shots

Update Asset with Rotating Item Number
Work Instruction



Doc Name: CORP AM WI Inventory_Update Asset with Rotating Item  Number
Author: Stores Improvement Project
Version: 12
Page 4 of 5
Approver: Team Leader, Asset Systems & Reporting
Doc ID: 40095413
Document Uncontrolled if Printed
Approved: September 2019




Location Creation via Maximo Interface 

Purpose
To describe steps to efficiently create a new location within Maximo using the interface.
Scope
This document relates to creating the new Location directly within the Maximo Interface
Refer to the Asset and Location bulk load document for creating Assets and Locations using the smart bulk load template
For direction around what should be created as an Asset or Location refer to the Corp AM Pro Maintaining the Asset Register document.

Instructions
Before you start you will need the following Information:
• The Location ID you wish to create (refer Corp AMP 005 for detail)
• The existing location the one you create will connect to (the “Parent”)
• The Classification of the location you are going to create or enough information to determine the classification from the pick list

1. Creating an initial shell Location
Open the Locations application by clicking Go To > Assets > Locations.
Click the New icon in the Maximo Toolbar. 

1.1. LOCATION TAB
Enter the following mandatory information in the Location tab:
1.1.1. Location: based on the location naming convention as outlined in CORP AM P005.
1.1.2. Description: Enter a short description of the location category and its position or purpose which will uniquely identify it e.g. ETP Tertiary Pre and Post Contact Basin Chlorine Analyser.
1.1.3. Long Description: click the Long Description icon and enter further details of the location category, its position and purpose

1.1.4. Location Type: select FUNCTION (You should only be creating a Functional location; refer to AK&S if you need to create any other location type)

1.1.5. Classification: Select the appropriate classification. Explore the classification tree or refer to a similar location to ensure the new location is classified consistently. Refer to an Asset Management Lead for advice if required.

1.1.6. Owner: Select MW for all Melbourne Water owned assets, or as appropriate for others.

1.1.7. Save the location



2. Placing the New Location in the Location Hierarchy

2.1.1. To add the new location into the Location Hierarchy, use the Select Action drop down and select Associate Systems with Location. 




2.1.2. Click on New Row, then click on the System Select Value icon



2.1.3. Select the required System from the list (usually Primary).

2.1.4. Enter the Parent location number in the Parent field. This should be the location that the new location sits directly beneath in the hierarchy. Press Tab to populate the details of the Parent location.

2.1.5. Click OK to save the parent location.

2.1.6. To view the new location in the hierarchy, click the Select Action drop down and select Open Drilldown. 



2.1.7. Click Show Path to Top.


2.1.8. The newly created location displays in blue in the location hierarchy.

2.1.9. 


3. Completing Location Information
After you have placed your new location into the hierarchy a number of fields in the main and other tabs will be automatically updated.
3.1. Location Tab 
This information needs to be validated and updated where necessary.
3.1.1. Primary Function(what function does this location perform): enter the primary function of the location
3.1.2. Secondary Function(what function is this location part of): verify that the selected function is correct or update as appropriate 
3.1.3. Responsible Party: identify the team accountable for managing the location
3.1.4. Criticality: leave this field blank
3.1.5. Service Contract: verify the Service Provider that should show up as the default against the location. For Civil / M&E this is usually WGPSN, for Natural assets and land this is usually WLID
3.1.6. Service Provider Division: verify that the appropriate depot is selected
3.1.7. Type: Operating. If you are creating another type of location (e.g. a store room or repair location) please refer to the Asset Knowledge & Systems team for guidance. 
3.1.8. Operational Area: Identify the relevant operational teams
3.1.9. Sub Area: enter the operational sub-area. Refer to a similar location for guidance. The data in this field links to Finance 1 and must be completed correctly. If you are unsure please seek guidance from your Team Leader or the Finance team.
3.1.10. GL Account: leave this field blank
3.1.11. Details box
In the Details box of the Location tab, enter or verify the following information:

Municipality: verify the location’s municipality (this is mandatory)
P and ID: If a Process & Instrumentation Drawing (P&ID) exists and this location is shown on the drawing, enter the relevant P&ID tag details. If the location is not shown on a P&ID (such as land, building, pit, waterway) this field should be left blank.
Drawing Number: enter the P&ID drawing number. If the location is not on a P&ID enter the relevant drawing e.g. Electrical Single Line Diagram or Main Layout Drawing
Drawing Reference: Enter any reference on the drawing that is not a P&ID tag
Please note: the specifications tab may also have a field for P and ID, however this this shortly be migrated to the Details tab.
3.1.12. 

Address Information box
In the Address Information box of the Location tab, verify that the service address of the location is appropriate.

3.1.13. Other boxes
There is currently no requirement to complete information in the SAMPS, Maintenance Regime or Calibration boxes of the Location tab.

3.1.14. Click Save to update the details entered.
3.2. LOCATION DETAILS TAB
To populate the new location’s GIS information, enter the LOC code into the GIS Location field. The LOC code is normally incorporated in the naming convention of the location e.g. 0101/MH035. Refer to CORP AM G006 for assistance.

3.3. ASSETS TAB
Not all locations require or allow an asset. This tab will populate when you create the asset (in the location), or the asset is issued from the store by the service provider.
3.4. SAFETY TAB
Enter all known relevant hazard information for the new location into the Hazards and Precautions sub-tab.

Click New Row and use the Hazard Detail Menu to add each hazard.

Enter the specifics of the Hazard in the details field.



3.5. SPECIFICATIONS TAB
Complete all relevant specifications defined for the classification of the location 
Note: The acquisition budget number and expected life are recorded against the asset purchase information box, not against the location
[SS1]

3.6. CERTIFICATIONS TAB
Enter any certification requirements for the location in the Certificates box.

3.7. Meters
Open the meters Group Selection. Search for the Classification in the Description. If there is not a specific meter group for that classification select the Location Default meter Group LOCNDFLT.
3.8. Activities
Validate that activities have been added to the location. 
Note: If there are no activities then a Work Order cannot be raised or a PM set up on the location.
3.9. Service Address, History, Audits and Surveys Tabs
Nothing additional to be added to these tabs at this time


Definitions 
Reference
Definition
Location
The representation of a physical location or grouping of locations within the AMIS
Classification
The definition of the type of Location which determines the data requirements to define it and the work that can be done on it
Parent
The location that a new location is attached to in order to establish a hierarchy, e.g. A Room is attached to a Building
System
The Location set, Primary system is the Active Locations which MW operates, the Planning System is the set of locations used to define future services and asset requirements



References
Standards and Related Documents
Corp AM Pro - Hierarchy Build Standard




Document History
Date
Reviewed/ Actioned By
Version
Action
18/05/2017
Stuart Smith
1.0
Develop
19/09/2018
Stuart Smith
2.0
General update with mandatory fields and formatting.


[SS1]Need better location attribute example


CORP AM WI
Location Creation via Maximo Interface 





Doc Name: Corp AM WI Location Creation via Maximo Interface
Author: Asset Management Strategist
Version: 2
Page 1 of 6
Approver: Asset Management Strategist
Doc ID: 39296073
Document Uncontrolled if Printed
Approved: Sep /2018


AM WI Location Hierarchy

KEY CONCEPTS
Melbourne Waters Asset Management Information System (Maximo) presently operates 2 Hierarchy systems.
1. The Primary System for Operational Locations and Assets
2. The Planning System for the Developer Funded Works System

Assets are contained within Locations in Maximo. A location can contain none, one or many assets. Within the Primary System Locations are structured in a hierarchy which was implemented with a number of objectives in mind:
• To represent the MW business, core service products, functions provided and specific sites
• Within the sites, to as far as practicable replicate the physical world.
A useful way of thinking of assets and locations is as a folder structure in a computer where the locations are the folders and the assets are the files, the locations describe the content and form the structure for where assets are held.

The location hierarchy consists of a cascade of 4 location types:
• Product
• Compclass (Complex Class)
• Complex
• Function

The Hierarchy is set within the system using the parent child relationship between locations objects in the Locations module.
A functional location represents the physical assets (such as pumps, valves, pits) and spaces (such as rooms and floors) and is the primary building block of the physical location hierarchy.
Work orders can only be raised on Location types of Function.
The intended benefits from this structure are as follows:
1. Facilitate an intuitive way to find a location or asset within the system to:
a. Remove the reliance on complicated asset naming structures
b. To help ensure work is associated to the correct asset.
2. Allow the roll-up of costs to any desired level.
3. Develop the ability to record, manage and report levels of service and risk
4. Improve management of safety (hazards and precautions), regulation and certification information through:
a. Reduction of duplication of information
b. Enabling systematic reporting
c. Improvement in the quality of safety messaging around inherent risks through to work delivery teams.



Overview of Hierarchy:
The location hierarchy as a representation of the  physical world starts at level 4 for Sewer and Water with the Complexes representing the sites. 
Most locations at or below a Complex should be able to be represented on a map as an area, line or point.
For Waterways the representation of the physical world begins and level 3 with the River Basin Catchments.
The location hierarchy, with MW at the top, Product at level 2, Complex Class at level 3 is set by the Asset Strategy and Performance team.
New Complexes at level 4 and Functional Locations at level 5 and below are owned and managed by the relevant Asset Management Team through the use of this document.


Principles used for developing the Functional Location Hierarchy beginning below the Level of Complex are as follows:
o Wherever practical, the hierarchy represents the spatial location of the object, rather than the process.
o Where complex location boundaries overlay each other, for example a Pumping Station complex spatially within a Dam Complex, the assets and locations are positioned in the hierarchy under the complex they service. 

Typical examples of a hierarchy structure for small sites are:








Refer to Corp AM Pro - Hierarchy Build Standard for details 

Notes: 
a) a parent child relationships can also be created between assets within a location to create an asset assembly.
b) There is currently no imposed limit to how many levels the hierarchy can go down however from a system performance and functional perspective the number of levels should rarely exceed 10.
c) A Functional Location can almost always be represented spatially in the GIS (exception, where a Functional Grouping helps to add clarity to the structure)
d) A location may represent a space and have no asset associated e.g. a room 

The Location Classification, as distinct from the Location types described above, provides the differentiation between different types of Functional location, defines the attributes/specifications for that Asset or Location type, controls the type of work (Activities) which can be done on the Asset or Location and a Location classification also sets the number of Assets that can be “inservice” in that location (0, 1, many).


There are occasions where it is not practical to define every functional location at the same level as the list becomes too long or the assets are broken up in a way that is illogical from a management perspective (these are usually assets which are linear in nature such as pipes, roads and cables). Under these circumstances it is more practical to group the functional locations into services across a Complex.  A “Conceptual” Functional Location is used to achieve this outcome. It is useful to think of these as additional layers across a site. The classification for a Conceptual Functional Location is a “Non Functional Group”.

Conceptual Location examples:




Adding a Functional Location to the Hierarchy:
For more detail refer to the Corp AM WI Location Creation work instruction.

To create and insert a Location in the hierarchy:
a. Go to Locations (HSE) in Maximo
b. Click the New Location icon from the menu new the top of the screen 
c. Enter the Location ID for the new location, add details about the new location including; Description, Location Type (always “FUNCTION"), select the classification, owner.
d. Select Action\Associate Systems with Location 
e. Click New Row
f. Enter or select the System: Primary, and enter or search for the Parent Location, Click OK
g. Review other data fields and complete as necessary. Many of the other key fields will have been auto populated when the location was added to the hierarchy.

Moving a Location within the Hierarchy:
a. Select Action\View/Modify Parents 
b. Enter the new Parent Location, OK





When you move a location within Maximo any child locations to that location, and any assets located within the location(s), will also be moved.

A number of data fields on the Location will also be updated in this process including: Service Address, Responsible Party, Default Service Provider, Primary Function 




Definitions 

Reference
Definitions
Location
The object which represents a place, function or grouping, which holds information about the required functionality, the physical location of where assets are operated, stored, or repaired; or an area where work occurs that is a subset of the land asset (area under management)
Asset
The object which represents the physical equipment, pipe, waterway etc. These can be used, bought sold, maintained etc.
Assembly
An asset hierarchy within a location
Functional Location
A Functional Location is a place where assets are operated, stored, or repaired; or an area under management. A functional location will be either geographical or part of a process. A functional location is also the highest level in the hierarchy where work can occur and cost can be incurred. Functional Locations are always below the fourth level, i.e starts at the 5th level and extends any number of hierarchical levels below.
Compclass
Locations of type compclass are always the third level in the hierarchy. These forms the containers for the larger asset groupings delivering a specific service this list currently includes:
o Treatment Plants
o Pump Stations
o Dams
o Reservoirs (Service reservoirs)
o Network Corridor (excluding waterways)
o River Basin

Complex  
A Complex has a defined boundary, has land associated with it and has an address. The complex must be able to be represented on a map. Examples are:
o Winneke Treatment Plant
o Eastern Treatment Plant
o Western Treatment Plant
o etc.…
Complexes are frequently, but not always, at the 4th level of the hierarchy.

Document History
Date
Reviewed/ Actioned By
Version
Action

Stuart Smith
0.1
Create
Sep 2018
Stuart Smith
1.0
Update and Align to Hierarchy Build Standard




AM WI Location Hierarchy





Doc Name: Corp AM WI Location Hierarchy
Author: Asset Management Strategist
Version: 1
Page 5 of 5
Approver: Asset Management Strategist
Doc ID: 39296072
Document Uncontrolled if Printed
Approved: Sep /2018







AM WI Minor Capital Deliver Project Wholesale Services

Table of Contents

1.	Purpose	1

2.	Scope	1

3.	Prerequisite Activities	1

4.	Roles	2

5.	Navigate Maximo Projects and WO Tracking Module	3

6.	Access a Work Order via the Go To Menu	5

7.	Navigate from a Project to Related Work Orders	7

8.	Update Project Details	8

9.	Update Scoping Work Order	10

10.	Request Review and Endorsement of Project Proposal	13

11.	Create Execution Deliverables and Generate Execution WO	18

12.	Close Scoping Work Order and Deliverable	27

13.	Request Variation for Approved Project	30

14.	Update Execution WO, Execution Deliverable and Project Status	31

15.	Request AK&T to Register Procured and Built Assets	36

16.	Request Endorsement of Project Handover and Practically Complete Execution Work Order	38

17.	Close Execution Work Order (s) and Execution Deliverables	41

19.	Definitions	44

20.	Document History 	44



1. Purpose

The purpose of this Work Instruction is to provide Service Providers working with Wholesale Services with the required steps to deliver a project through the Project and Work Order Tracking modules in Maximo.

2. Scope

This document relates to the delivery of projects from a project status of ‘Project in Estimation’ in Maximo. Having the right data to improve business decision making and track the progress of all projects is essential for us to deliver works more productively and meet our service delivery obligations. 

3. Prerequisite Activities

• The ‘Project Initiator’ has created a project in Project Online and this has migrated to Maximo

• ‘Governance’ has created a scope deliverable and work order

• The Project status is in ‘Project in Estimation’.

4. Roles

Role

Responsibility

Project Initiator

Creates project in Project Online. Reviews and updates project in Maximo. 

Governance Team

Manage the effective delivery of the Minor Capital Program

Governance Officer

Approve projects for scoping, release and completion. Review project functional requirements, project proposals, handover requirements to ensure project objectives have been met.

Operations/Stakeholders

Review Functional Requirements and liaise with Service Provider for handover requirements.

Service Provider

The team that will execute the works on the ground. In the context of Maximo instructions, this is either Waterways and Land Delivery (WLD) or Wood. Creates execution deliverables and work orders as required.







5. Navigate Maximo Projects and WO Tracking Module

5.1 Access a Project via Start Centre

1

Log into Maximo and click the Project Service Provider Start Centre tab.







Note:	The Start Centre displays various tables of projects and/or work order in various stages of the lifecycle.



2

Navigate to the relevant table and click any Project or Work Order Number.

Note:	This opens the Project or Work Order in the Main tab.

 

5.2 Access a Project via the Go To Menu

1

Use the Go To menu in the navigation toolbar, select Work Orders > Projects.



Enter the Project Number in the Find field.



Press Enter (or click ) to open the Project in the Main tab.





6. Access a Work Order via the Go To Menu

1

Click the Go To menu and select Go To>Work Orders> Work Order Tracking (HSE)



Type the work order number in the Find field and press Enter (or click ) to perform the search.



Note:	The work order displays in the Main tab. This will retrieve only that specific work order.

2

Alternatively, you can access all work orders related to a project in the WO Tracking (HSE) module.

Use the scroll bar at the bottom of the screen to scroll far right to the Project field.



Type the project number in the Project field and press Enter

1. 

Note:	This displays all work orders related to the specific project number.

Click the required work order number. 



Note:	The work order displays in the Work Order tab.









7. Navigate from a Project to Related Work Orders

1

From the Main Project tab, click the Cost Details tab.



2

1. Scroll down to the Work Orders section.

Click  (Chevron) next to the work order number you want to navigate to.

Click Go to WO Tracking (HSE).



Note:	The work order displays in the WO Tracking (HSE) Module in the Main tab.









8. Update Project Details

Prerequisite activities:

• The ‘Project Initiator’ has created a project in Project Online and Maximo.

• The Governance Officer has moved the Project status to ‘Project in Estimation’.

• The Governance Officer has created a ‘SCOPINGREL’ log for the Service Provider to review.

• The Governance Officer has created a scoping work order and moved to a  status of ‘WSCHED’.



Step 

Action

1

Navigate to the Project

2

Note:	The Project details, such as functional requirements, handover checklists and other project documentation will be attached to the project in Maximo. Service Providers need to review documents to ensure there is enough information attached to build a project proposal. If there is not sufficient information, the Service Provider will need to liaise with Governance to obtain more detail.

Accessing project attachments

From the Main tab, click  (Attachment icon) in the top right corner.

Note:	The View Attachments window displays with all project attachments.

Click the document number link to view the attachment.



Note:	The document opens in a separate window.

Click OK to close the View Attachments window.

3

In the Main tab, scroll down to the ‘Responsibility’ section and populate the following fields:

Field

Action

Project Manager



Note:	The Project Manager field may be populated with the Project Initiator’s name from the Project Online integration.

Enter the Service Provider Project Manager responsible for delivery. 

Delivery Team

Enter the Service Provider team delivering the work.

Delivery Officer

Use this field to indicate the Service Providers Project Manager’s manager (Area Leader etc..)





Use the filter fields to search for the required value and press Enter (or click ) to perform the search. 

Select the value in the person field to add the required value.



Note:	This will add the Selected Value to the Project Manager field.

Click  (Chevron) next to the Delivery Team field and click Select Value

Use the filter fields to search for the required value and press Enter (or click ) to perform the search. 

Select the value in the person group field to add the required value. For Wood, this value is 4670.





4

Repeat Step 3 above to populate the Delivery Officer field.





9. Update Scoping Work Order

Prerequisite activities:

• A scoping Work Order has been generated by the Governance Officer and Governance has assigned to a Service Provider.

• The Governance Officer has moved the scoping Work Order into a status of ‘Waiting to be Scheduled’ (WSCHED).

• The Governance Officer has moved the Project scope deliverable to a status of ‘In Progress’.

• The Governance Officer has created a SCOPINGREL log for the Service Provider to review.

Step

Action

1

Navigate to the scoping Work Order via the Project

2

In the Work Order tab, scroll down to the Responsibility section and populate the following fields:

Field

Action

Lead

Enter the person undertaking the estimation.

Supervisor

Enter the Project Manager if different from the person estimating the work.



Click  (Chevron) next to the Lead field and click Select Value. 



Use the filter fields to search for the required value and press Enter (or click ) to perform the search. 

Select the value in the Person field to populate the Lead field.



Repeat the above steps to populate the Supervisor field.



Click  (Save) to save changes made to the Work Order.



Note:	The Scheduled Start and Scheduled Finish dates will already be populated by Governance. Use  (calendar icon) to select adjust dates if required. 







3

Click Select Action>Change Status or click  (Change Status) to display the Change Status window.



4

Click the dropdown list next to the New Status field, select ‘Scheduled’.

Click OK to change the status.



Note:	The Status Date field will auto populate with the Now date and time.



5

Repeat steps 3 & 4 to change the status to ‘In Progress’ and click OK.







10. Request Review and Endorsement of Project Proposal

Note: Once the project proposal has been developed, the Service Provider will request a review and endorsement of project proposal from Governance.

Prerequisite activities:

• The ‘Service Provider’ has completed scoping work on the ground.

• The ‘Service Provider’ has developed the Project Proposal.

• The ‘Service Provider’ has moved the scoping work order and scope deliverable into a status of ‘In Progress’.



Step

Action

1

Navigate to the Project

2

From the Main tab, click  (Attachment icon) in the top right corner to attach the project proposal.

3



To

Action

Add New Web Page

Go to Step 3

Add New File

Go to Step 5



Click Add New Attachment then Add new Web Page





4

Paste in the URL Link.

Type in the document name.



Click OK.

5

Click Add New Attachment then Add New File





6

Click Browse to locate the file on your local drive

Enter a Name for the document

Click OK



7

From the Project, click the Review and Endorse tab.





8

1. Navigate to the Reviewers section and click New Row.

2. 

Enter the Reviewer name or click  (Chevron) next to the field to choose from value list.

3. 

Note: The Reviewer will be the Governance Officer.



9

Click  next to the Review Topic field.



10

Search for the Review Topic of ‘Provision of Quote’ (PROVOFQTE) and press Enter.



Click the required option in the Value field.

11

4. Enter Comments as needed. 

5. 



12

6. Click  (Save).

7. 

Note: The proposal will now appear in the Start Centre of the assigned Reviewer. The Governance Officer will review the proposal and move the project status to ‘Approved’ as required.



13

Navigate to the scoping work order as per Section 1 instructions.

14

Click Select Action>Change Status or click  (Change Status) to display the Change Status window.

8. 



15

Click the dropdown list next to the New Status field, select ‘Practical Completion’.

Click OK to change the status.











11. Create Execution Deliverables and Generate Execution WO

Prerequisite activities:

• The ‘Service Provider’ has moved scoping work order into a status of ‘Practical Completion’.

• The ‘Service Provider’ has submitted the project proposal to Governance for approval.

• The ‘Governance Officer’ has approved the project proposal and moved the project to ‘Approved’ status.

• The ‘Governance Officer’ has created an ‘EXECREL’ log for the ‘Service Provider’ to review.



Step

Action

1

Navigate to the Project

2

Create project execution deliverable

From the Main tab, scroll down to the Project Deliverables section and click New Deliverable.

 



3

9. Populate the following fields in the Project Deliverable Information section.

Field

Action

Project Deliverable Description

This is the description that best suits the deliverable. e.g. Aeration Tank pump renewal. 

Deliverable Type

Select ‘EXECUTION’.

Activity

Select from a set list of activities. 

This field isn’t mandatory but good practice to populate. 

Project Deliverable Allocation

• Enter the total amount specific for that deliverable.

Note: The amount must allow provision for management fees and profit but exclude GST.

Target Start

• The earliest date that any Work Order can start. 

Note: SPs cannot start works before this date. 

No expenditure can be processed before this date.

Target Finish date

When the Work Order absolutely must be completed by, (e.g. may be due to Regulatory requirement, seasonal requirement). 







Note:	The deliverable status will default to a status of ‘READY’.







4

10. Repeat step 3 for each project deliverable if required and click  (Save).

5

Create execution work orders

Click Select Action>Generate Work Orders.



6

Tick the checkbox on the left hand side of the deliverable number to select the deliverable requiring a work order creation.

Note:	Multiple deliverables can be selected at the one time, but only one work order can be generated per deliverable each time.

Select the number of Work Orders required, up to a maximum of 10



• 

Click Generate WO.



Note:	This will generate a work order for each deliverable selected.

Note:	The second section of the Generate Work Orders screen will show any work orders previously generated for each deliverable. Check the work orders already created to avoid raising duplicates.







7

A system message displays, showing the work order numbers created from the project deliverable(s).



Click OK to close this message

8

1.  Click the Cost Details tab to display the generated work orders.

2. 

3. Under the Work Orders section, click  (Chevron) next to the Work Order number and select Go to WO Tracking (HSE). 

4. 

Note:	This will open the relevant work order in the Work Order Tracking module. The work order will be in a status of ‘Draft’.





Maximo will auto-populate the following fields from the Project:

Field

Description

Work Order Description

This field will auto-populate based on the deliverable description. The description can be updated if required.

Service Contract

Shows the contract number of the service provider (WLID-WC01).

Service Provider

This field will auto-populate based on the Service Contract.

Responsible Party

Shows the responsible party group 4660 (Project Group WLD)

Activity

Shows the activity selected when generating the deliverable.

Target Start Date

This field will auto-populate based on the SP Notified Date and the Contracted Priority, according to the pre-determined KPI business rules. 

Note: For a L4 work order, this date can be manually adjusted.



9

Populate the following fields in the Work Order tab:

Field

Action

Service Provider Division

Select the division of the Service Provider that will undertake scoping work.

Discipline

Select the discipline that best suits the type of project.

Contracted Priority

This is the KPI priority/response time of the work order. 

Always select L4 for any project related work order.

SP Notified Date

Enter the date the Service Provider is to be notified of the work order. 

Note: This will default to the Now date and time if date isn’t selected using the calendar icon.

Target Finish Date

Enter the date execution works are targeted to finish.

Scheduled Start

Enter the date for execution works to commence.

Scheduled Finish

Enter the date for execution works to finish.















10

Click Select Action>Change Status or click  (Change Status) to display the Change Status window. 



11

Select new status of ‘Estimate and Plan’ and click OK. 



12

Creating a manual estimate

Note:	The Service Provider will need to enter a manual estimate before the work order can be moved into the next status

Navigate to the Estimates and Actuals section.

Click the Use Manual Estimates? checkbox.



Note:	The Manual Estimate field will now be enabled.



13

Enter the cost in the Manual Estimate field of the work order and click  (Save) located at the top of the menu.

 



Note: This estimate is the value from the project proposal and includes direct costs, management services and fee.



14

Updating the Scheduled Start and Finish Dates

The Service provider will need to enter the scheduled start and finish dates for the execution of the project which they have submitted in their proposal.

Navigate to the Scheduling Information section.

Enter schedule start and finish dates using the calendar icon next to the fields.



12

Click Select Action>Change Status or click  (Change Status) to display the Change Status window.

5. 

Note: If a manual estimate is not entered, the Service Provider has to first move the status to ‘Estimate and Plan’ and then move the status to ‘Waiting for Approval’.



13

Select new status of ‘Waiting on Approval’ and click OK to change the status.



Note: Maximo will automatically move the status to ‘Waiting to be scheduled’. 





12. Close Scoping Work Order and Deliverable

Prerequisite activities:

• Governance has reviewed and approved project proposal. 

• Governance has moved the project status to ‘Approved’.

• Scoping work order is in a status of ‘Practically Complete’.

• Scoping work has been completed and costs have been attributed to scoping work order.



Step

Action

1

Navigate to the Scoping Work Order

2

Click Select Action>Change Status or click  (Change Status) to display the Change Status window.



3

Once all scoping costs have been finalised and attributed to the work order, the work order can be designated commercially complete.

Click Select Action>Change Status or click  (Change Status) to display the Change Status window.



Click the drop down list next to the New Status field, select ‘Commercial Completion’ 

Click OK to change the status.



4

Click  (Chevron) next to the Project field and click Go To Projects to navigate to the project.



5

The Project Manager will navigate to the Project Deliverables section and click  (Change Status) next to the Scoping Deliverable status.



6

Select the New Status of ‘Complete’ and click OK.



Note: The Scoping work order must be in a status of ‘Commercial Completion’ in order to change the deliverable status. 

Note: If project has NOT been approved for execution, the project status will be ‘Project in estimation’. Governance will contact the Service Provider to close out the scoping work order and deliverables. Governance will then move the project status to ‘Closed’.









13. Request Variation for Approved Project

Prerequisite activities:

• Governance has reviewed and approved project proposal. 

• Governance has moved the project status to ‘Approved’.

• If a project has been approved and there are variations to the budget or scope of the project, the Service Provider will need to add a review and endorse entry to the project. A variation could be a change to the functional requirements, a change to the P95 value or a change to the Project Completion date.

Step

Action

1

Navigate to the Project

2

Click the Review and Endorse tab.





3

Navigate to the Reviewers section and click New Row. 

		

Enter the Reviewer name or click  (Chevron) next to the field to choose from the value list.



Note: The Reviewer will be the Governance Officer

4

Click  next to the Review Topic field.

 

5

Search for the Review Topic and press Enter. The Review topic will be Request for Variation.



Click the required option in the Value field.

6

Enter Comments as needed. 



7

Click  (Save).



Note: The variation will now appear in the Start Centre of the assigned Reviewer.

Click Start Centre to return to your front dashboard.





Note: Governance will liaise with the relevant Initiator to action the variation request.



14. Update Execution WO, Execution Deliverable and Project Status

Prerequisite activities:

• Governance has changed the project status to ‘Approved’.

• The Service Provider has moved the execution work order status to ‘Waiting to be scheduled’.

• The ‘Governance Officer’ has created an EXECREL log for the ‘Service Provider’ to review.



Step

Action

1

Navigate to the execution Work Order

2

Navigate to the Responsibility section and populate the following fields:

Field

Action

Supervisor

Enter the Area Lead

Lead

Enter the Project Manager

Populate the Supervisor and Lead fields. 

Click  (Chevron) next to the fields to select a value.





3

Scroll down to the Scheduling Information section and use  (calendar icon) to update the Scheduled start  and Scheduled finish dates if required.





4

Click Select Action>Change Status or click  (Change Status) to display the Change Status window.





5

Click the dropdown list next to the New Status field, select ‘Scheduled’.

Click OK to change the status. 



6

Repeat steps 4 & 5 to change the status to ‘In Progress’ and click OK.



7

Click  (Chevron) next to the Project field and select Go To Projects.



8

Navigate to the Project Deliverables section and click  (Change Status) next to the execution deliverable status to display the Change Deliverable Status window.





9

Select the New Status of ‘In Progress’ and click OK.



6. 

10

Change the project status

Scroll to the top of the page and click Select Action>Change Status or click  (Change Status) to display the Change Status window.



11

Select New Status of ‘In Progress’ and click OK.









15. Request AK&T to Register Procured and Built Assets

Prerequisite activities:

• The Service provider has completed installation and/or physical execution works on ground.

• Assets have been procured or built which need to be registered in Maximo.

• Drawings, Manuals, and completed Asset and Location data load templates have been emailed to IT Support with the project number in the email title.



Step 

Action

1

Navigate to the Project

2

From the Project, click the Review and Endorse tab.





3

Navigate to the Reviewers section and click New Row.



4

Enter the Reviewer name or click  (Chevron) next to the field to choose from value list. The Reviewer will be an AK&S data team member. Refer to the Asset Data Intranet page for contact details.



5

Click  next to the Review Topic field and select value ‘As Cons’ (ASCONS)’



6

Enter Comments as needed.





7

Click  (Save).



Note: This will now appear in the Start Centre of the assigned ‘Reviewer’.







16. Request Endorsement of Project Handover and Practically Complete Execution Work Order

Prerequisite activities:

• The Service Provider has completed execution activities.

• The procured or built asset information has been provided to AK&S as needed.

• The Service Provider has moved the execution work order (s) to a status of ‘In Progress’.



Step 

Action

1

Navigate to the Project 

2

From the Project, click the Review and Endorse tab.



3

Navigate to the Endorsers section and click New Row.





4

Enter the Endorser name or click  (Chevron) next to the field to choose from value list.



Note: The ‘Endorser’ will be the Governance Officer.

5

Click  (Search) next to the Topic field and select HANDREQ (Handover Request).





6

Enter comments as needed.

 

7

Click  (Save).

Note: The Governance officer will receive an automated email advising there is a project to endorse. The handover request will now appear in their Start Centre under the Projects I need to review table. The Governance officer will complete the handover checklist attached to the Project.



8

The execution work order now needs to be moved to a status of ‘Practical Completion’. Navigate to the execution Work Order using the Section 1 instructions.

9

Click Select Action>Change Status or click  (Change Status) to display the Change Status window.





10

Click the drop down list next to the New Status field, select ‘Practical Completion’.

Click OK to change the status.



Note: Ensure all execution invoices and labour costs have been attributed to the work orders.

Note: The Governance Officer will move the Project Status to ‘Practically Complete, ‘Defect Liability Period’ and then ‘Complete’ 









17. Close Execution Work Order (s) and Execution Deliverables

1. Execution deliverables and work orders can be completed at any stage during project delivery, once work is completed.

2. Once project handover has been endorsed, the Service Provider will commercially complete and close any remaining execution work order (s) and execution deliverables.

3. Governance will move the project status to ‘Practically Complete’ and then ‘Complete’. 

Prerequisite activities :

• Handover of project has been reviewed and endorsed.

• All project costs have been entered and finalised. 

• Governance has moved the project status to ‘Practically Complete’.



Step 

Action

1

Navigate to the execution Work Order

2

Click Select Action>Change Status or click  (Change Status) to display the Change Status window.

4. 



3

5. From the drop down list, select New Status of ‘Commercial Completion’ and click OK 



Note:	Ensure all execution invoices and labour costs have been attributed to the work orders. All labour entries must be approved. 

No further costs can be added. 

4

Click  (Chevron) next to the Project field and click Go To Projects to navigate to the project.



5

Project Manager will navigate to the Project Deliverables section and click  (Change Status) next to the execution deliverable status.



6

Select status of ‘Complete’ and click OK.



Note:	All execution work orders must be in a status of ‘Commercial Completion’ to allow the deliverables to be completed.





18. 



19. Definitions

Reference

Definition

Activity

Activity that best describes the project or work order

AK&S

Asset Knowledge and Systems team within Melbourne Water

Approved Value

Approved Project Value (P95 in Project Online)

Business Driver

The business reason for the project

CRO

Customer Response Officer

Deliverable

Tasks required for the scope and execution of a project. Used to divide the project into logical segments of work.

Delivery Mechanism

The mechanism as to how the project will be delivered

Delivery Team

Team responsible for delivering the project

Delivery Officer

Service Provider’s Project Manager’s manager

Lead

Person leading the work order

NRM

Natural Resource Management

PM

Project Manager

Product

The Melbourne Water product line the project is supporting

Responsible Party

Groups responsible for the work order

Scheduled Start

The date works are scheduled to commence

Scheduled Finish

The date works are scheduled to be completed

SP Notified Date

The date the Service Provider is notified of the works

SP Quote

Service Provider quote. This is the same value as the initial quote (P50) in Project Online at BCA stage

Supervisor

The Supervisor or Area Lead for the project

Target Start

The date works are targeted to commence

Target Finish

The date works are targeted to be completed

20. Document History 

Date

Reviewed/

Actioned By

Version

Action

April 2021

System & Documentation Specialist

10

Annual review, template update









AM WI Minor Capital Deliver Project Wholesale Services

Work Instruction











Doc ID: 50867448

Page 1 of 46

Version: 10

Date: 04/2021

Doc Name: AM WI Minor Capital Deliver Project Wholesale

Author: Systems & Documentation Specialist

Approver: Asset Management Systems Team Leader

Document uncontrolled if printed


Deliver Minor Capital Project  - Waterways and Land
Work Instructions


Purpose
The purpose of this Work Instruction is to provide Waterways and Land users with the required steps to deliver a project through the Project module in Maximo.

Scope
This document relates to the delivery of projects from a project status of ‘Project in Estimation’ in Maximo. Having the right data to improve business decision making and track the progress of all projects is essential for us to deliver works more productively and meet our service delivery obligations.

Prerequisite activities
➢ The ‘Project Initiator’ has created a project in Project Online and this has migrated to Maximo.
➢ The ‘Project Initiator’ has created a scope deliverable and work order.
➢ The Project status is in ‘Project in Estimation’.


Roles
Role
Responsibility
Project Initiator
Creates project in Project Online. Reviews and updates project in Maximo. 
Governance Officer
Approve projects for scoping, release and completion. Review project functional requirements, project proposals, handover requirements to ensure project objectives have been met.
Operations/Stakeholders
Review Functional Requirements and liaise with Service Provider for handover requirements.
Service Provider
The team that will execute the works on the ground. In the context of Maximo instructions, this is either Waterways and Land Delivery (WLD) or Wood. Creates execution deliverables and work orders as required.



Useful Links
Resource Document
Inflo Link
Inflo work instructions
http://inflo/inflo/llisapi.dll/open/42865123 
Definitions List
http://inflo/inflo/llisapi.dll/open/42485513 
Work Order Status flow chart
http://inflo/inflo/llisapi.dll/open/42979090 
Process Map WLD
http://inflo/inflo/llisapi.dll/open/43242462
CORP AM WI Minor Capital Handover
http://inflo/inflo/cs.exe/properties/39270684
AMIS User Guide Estimate Approve Work Order
http://inflo/inflo/cs.exe/open/26924213 
Project Status definitions
http://inflo/inflo/cs.exe/Open/55032228
Project Status Flow Chart 
http://inflo/inflo/cs.exe/open/55250409

To
Go to
Page
Navigate Maximo Projects and WO Tracking modules
• To access a project via the Start Centre
• To access a Project via the Go To Menu
• To access a Work Order via the Go To menu
• To navigate from a Project to related work orders
Section 1
4
Update project details
Section 2
10
Update scoping Work Order
Section 3
14
Create execution Deliverables and execution Work Orders
Section 4
18
Request review and endorsement of project proposal
Section 5
28
Capture any variations for approved project
Section 6
33
Close scoping Work Order and deliverable for approved project
Section 7
36
Update execution Work Order, execution deliverable and project status
Section 8
39
Request AK&S to register procured and built assets
Section 9
43
Request review and endorse for project handover
Section 10
45
Close execution Work Order and complete execution deliverable
Section 11
47



Section 1 – Navigate Maximo Projects and WO Tracking module

To access a project via the Start Centre
1
Log into Maximo and click the Project Service Provider Start Centre tab.



Note:	The Start Centre displays various tables of projects and/or work orders in various stage of the project lifecycle.

2
Navigate to the relevant table and click any Project or Work Order Number.
Note:	This will open the Project or Work Order in the Main tab.

 
3
Go to Section 2.


To access a Project via the Go To Menu
1
a) Use the Go To menu in the navigation toolbar, select Work Orders > Projects.


b) Enter the Project Number in the Find field.


c) Press Enter (or click ) to open the Project in the Main tab.
2
Go to Section 2.
















To access a Work Order via the Go To menu
1
a) Click the Go To menu and select Go To>Work Orders> Work Order Tracking (HSE)

b) Type the work order number in the Find field and press Enter (or click ) to perform the search.


Note:	The work order displays in the Main tab.

2
Go to Section 2.









To navigate from a project to related work orders
1
From the Main Project tab, click the Cost Details tab.

2
a) Scroll down to the Work Orders section.
b) Click  (Chevron) next to the work order number you want to navigate to.
c) Click Go to WO Tracking (HSE).



Note:	The work order displays in the WO Tracking (HSE) Module in the Main tab.

3
Alternatively, you can access work orders via the WO Tracking (HSE) module.

a) Click the Go To menu and select Go To>Work Orders> Work Order Tracking (HSE).


Note:	The List tab displays.

b) Use the scroll bar at the bottom of the screen to scroll far right to the Project field.

Type the project number in the Project field and press Enter.


Note:	This displays all work orders related to the specific project number.

c) Click the required work order number. 


Note:	The work order displays in the Work Order tab.

4
Go to Section 2.



Section 2 – Update project details
Prerequisite activities
• The Project Initiator has created a project in Project Online and Maximo.
• The Project Initiator has moved the project status to ‘Project in Estimation’.
• The Project Initiator Governance has created a Scoping Release Review and Endorse entry in the project.

Step 
Action
1
Navigate to the Project as per Section 1 instructions.
2

Note:	The Project details, such as functional requirements, handover checklists and other project documentation will be attached to the project in Maximo. The Service Provider will review documentation to ensure there is enough information attached to build a project proposal. If there is not sufficient information, the Service Provider will need to liaise with the Project Initiator and Operations to obtain more detail.

Accessing project attachments
a) From the Main tab, click (Attachment icon) in the top right corner.

Note:	The View Attachments window displays with all project attachments.

b) Click the document number link to view the attachment.

Note:	The document opens in a separate window.

c) Click OK to close the View Attachments window.

3
a) In the Main tab, scroll down to the ‘Responsibility’ section and populate the following fields:
Field
Action
Project Manager
Note:	The Project Manager field will be initially populated with the Project Initiator’s name from the Project Online integration.

Enter the Service Provider Project Manager responsible for delivery. 
Delivery Team
Enter the Service Provider team delivering the work. 
Note: This is the Minor Capital Team.
Delivery Officer
Use this field to indicate the Service Providers Project Manager’s manager (e.g. Team Leader)

b) Click  (Chevron) next to the Project Manager field and click Select Value.

c) Use the filter fields to search for the required value and press Enter (or click ) to perform the search. 
d) Select the value in the person field to add the required Project Manager.



Note:	This will add the Selected Value to the Project Manager field.

e) Repeat the above steps to populate the Delivery Team and Delivery Officer fields.
4
From the Main tab, scroll down to the Project Deliverables section. 

a) Click the arrow to expand the scoping Project Deliverable entry.



b) Review the Target Start and Target Finish dates of the scoping deliverable.




c) Click the date field or use  (calendar icon) to update the Target Start and/or Target Finish dates if required.



d) Click  (Save) to save any changes made to the Work Order.
5
End of Section 2 work instruction.

































Section 3 – Update Scoping Work Order
Prerequisite activities
• A scoping Work Order has been generated by Project Initiator Governance and has been assigned to Waterways and Land Delivery (WLD).
• The Project Initiator Governance has moved the scoping Work Order into a status of ‘Waiting to be Scheduled’ (WSCHED). 
Note: if the scoping work order isn’t in this status, please contact the Project Initiator Governance.
• The Project Initiator Governance has moved the scope deliverable to a status of ‘In Progress’.
• The Project Initiator Governance has created a Scoping Release Review and Endorse entry in the project.

Step
Action
1
Navigate to the scoping work order via the Project as per Section 1 instructions.
2
a) In the Work Order tab, scroll down to the Responsibility section and populate the Lead field.
Field
Action
Lead
Enter the Design and Estimation Lead.

b) Click  (Chevron) next to the Lead field and click Select Value. 


c) Use the filter fields to search for the required value and press Enter (or click ) to perform the search. 
d) Select the value in the Person field to populate the Lead field.


e) Click  (Save) to save changes made to the Work Order.


Note:	The Scheduled Start and Scheduled Finish dates will already be populated by the Project Initiator. Use  (calendar icon) to adjust dates if required. 




3
Click Common Actions>Change Status to display the Change Status window.

4
a) Click the dropdown list next to the New Status field, select ‘Scheduled’.
b) Click OK to change the status.


Note:	The Status Date field will auto populate with the Now date and time.

5
Repeat steps 3 & 4 to change the status to ‘In Progress’ and click OK.



Navigate to the Project field, click the   (Chevron) and select ‘Go to Projects’.




Navigate to the Review and Endorse tab




Under the Reviewers section, navigate to the scoping release entry and click the Reviewed? checkbox. Then click  (Save)

 

6
End of Section 3 work instruction.



Section 4 – Create execution deliverables and generate execution Work Order

Note:	Execution deliverables and work orders can be created prior to project proposal submission but must only be moved to a status of ‘Waiting to be scheduled’. 

Prerequisite activities
• The ‘Project Initiator Governance’ has created the scoping Work Order and scope deliverable and moved the scope deliverable into a status of ‘In Progress’.
• The ‘Service Provider’ has moved scope work order and into a status of ‘In Progress’
• The ‘Project Initiator Governance’ has moved the project to ‘Project In estimation’ status.
• The project proposal is in the process of being drafted by the Service Provider.

Step
Action
1
Navigate to the Project as per Section 1 instructions.
2
Create project execution deliverable

From the Main tab, navigate down to the Project Deliverables section and click New Deliverable.

 

3
Populate the following fields in the Project Deliverable Information section.
Field
Action
Project Deliverable Description
This is the description that best suits the task.
Deliverable Type
Select ‘EXECUTION’.
Activity
Select from a set list of activities. 
Note: This field isn’t mandatory but good practice to populate.
Project Deliverable Allocation
Enter the total amount specific for that deliverable. 
Note: The amount must allow provision for management fees but exclude GST. This field isn’t mandatory.
Target Start
The earliest date that any Work Order can start. 
Note: SPs cannot start works before this date. 
No expenditure can be processed before this date.
Target Finish date
When the Work Order absolutely must be completed (e.g. may be due to Regulatory requirement, seasonal requirement). 




Note:	The deliverable status will default to a status of ‘READY’.

4
Repeat step 3 for each project deliverable and and click  (Save).
5
Create execution work orders
Click More Actions>Generate Work Orders

6
a) Tick the checkbox on the left hand side of the deliverable number to select the deliverable requiring a work order creation.

Note:	Multiple deliverables can be selected at the one time, but only one work order can be generated per deliverable each time.
b) Select the number of Work Orders required, up to a maximum of 10



c) Click Generate WO. 
Note:	This will generate a work order for each deliverable selected. 

Note:	The second section of the Generate Work Orders screen displays any work orders previously generated for each deliverable. 
Check the work orders already created to avoid raising duplicate WOs.

7
A system message displays, showing the work order numbers created from the project deliverable(s).
 
Click OK to close this message.
8
a)  Click the Cost Details tab to display the generated work orders.

b) Under the Work Orders section, click  (Chevron) next to the Work Order number and select Go to WO Tracking (HSE). 



Note:	This will open the relevant work order in the Work Order Tracking module. The work order will be in a status of ‘Draft’.

Alternatively, you can search for generated work order as per Section 1 instructions.


Maximo will auto-populate the following fields from the Project:
Field
Description
Work Order Description
This field will auto-populate based on the deliverable description. The description can be updated if required.
Service Contract
Shows the contract number of the service provider (WLID-WC01).
Service Provider
This field will auto-populate based on the Service Contract.
Responsible Party
Shows the responsible party group 4660 (Project Group WLD)
Activity
Shows the activity selected when generating the deliverable.
Target Start Date
This field will auto-populate based on the SP Notified Date and the Contracted Priority, according to the pre-determined KPI business rules. 
Note: For a L4 work order, this date can be manually adjusted.

9
Populate the following fields in the Work Order tab:

Field
Action
Service Provider Division
Select the division of the Service Provider that will undertake scoping work.
Discipline
Select the discipline that best suits the type of project.
Contracted Priority
This is the KPI priority/response time of the work order. 
Always select L4 for any project related work order.
SP Notified Date
Enter the date the Service Provider is to be notified of the work order. 
Target Finish Date
Enter the date execution works are expected to be completed.
Scheduled Start
Enter the date for execution works to commence. 
Scheduled Finish
Enter the date for execution works to finish.







 
10
Navigate to the left hand menu, click Common Actions>Change Status to display the Change Status window.

11
a) Click the dropdown list next to the New Status field, select ‘Estimate and Plan’.
b) Click OK to change the status.

12
Creating a manual estimate
The Service Provider will need to enter a manual estimate before the work order can be moved into the next status. 

a) Navigate to the Estimates and Actuals section.
b) Click the Use Manual Estimates? checkbox.

Note:	The Manual Estimate field will now be enabled. This figure will include management services.

13
Enter the cost in the Manual Estimate field of the work order and click  (Save) located at the top of the menu.

 

14
Note:	In order to move the execution work order through to an active status, the Execution Approval Group field and the Execution Approval checkbox both need to be blank.
On the Work Order, scroll down to the Responsibility section 

Ensure the Execution Approval Group field is blank.



15
Click the Approvals tab on the top menu.


16
Ensure the Execution Approval Required checkbox is unchecked. 
If this box is checked, click to remove the tick.

17
Repeat steps 10 & 11 to change the status to Waiting to be scheduled and click OK.


18
End of Section 4 work instruction. 



Section 5 – Request review and endorsement of project proposal

Note:	Once the project proposal has been developed, the Service Provider will request review and endorsement of project proposal from WLD Governance.

Prerequisite activities
• The ‘Service Provider’ has completed scoping work on the ground.
• The ‘Service Provider’ has developed Project Proposal 
• The ‘Service Provider’ has generated execution work orders and they are in a status of ‘Waiting to be scheduled’.
• The Execution deliverable is in a status of ‘Ready’.
• The project is in a status of ‘Project in estimation’.
• Both the scoping work order and scope deliverable are in a status of ‘In Progress’.

Step
Action
1
Navigate to the Project as per Section 1 instructions.
2
From the Main tab, click (Attachment icon) in the top right corner to attach the project proposal.


3
Click Add New Attachment then Add new Web Page



4
a) Copy and paste the Inflo link into the Specify the URL field. 
b) Enter a name for the file in Name the document field.


c) Click OK.

5
Click the Financial tab.

6
a) Navigate to the Project Funding section.
b) Click the SP Quote field and populate with the Project P50 amount.
c) Click the Approved Value field and populate the Project P95 value .

Note: The P95 value must include the total costs of the project including all scoping costs.

7
Click the Review and Endorse tab.



8
a) Navigate to the Reviewers section and click New Row.

b) Enter the Reviewer name or click  (Chevron) next to the field to choose from value list.


Note: The Reviewer will be your Minor Capital Team Leader. They will act in the role of Governance at this point.

9
Click  next to the Review Topic field.

10
a) Search for the Review Topic of ‘Provision of Quote’ (PROVOFQTE) and press Enter.
b) Click the required option in the Value field.
11
Enter Comments as needed. 

12
a) Click  (Save).


Note: The proposal notification will now appear in the Start Centre of the assigned Reviewer. The WLD Governance Officer will review the proposal and move the project status to ‘Approved’ as required.

Note: If the proposal exceeds the P95 value or a change in functional requirements is required, the Governance Officer will send the proposal back to the Project Initiator via a Review and Endorse entry in the project.

b) Click Start Centre to return to your front dashboard.


13
End of Section 5 work instructions.



Section  6 – Capture any variations for approved project
Prerequisite activities
If a project has been approved and there are variations to the budget or scope of the project, the Service Provider will need to add a review and endorse entry to the project. A variation could be a change to the functional requirements, a change to the P95 value or a change to the Project Completion date.

Step
Action
1
Click the Review and Endorse tab.



2
a) Navigate to the Reviewers section and click New Row. 
		
b) Enter the Reviewer name or click  (Chevron) next to the field to choose from the value list.

Note: The Reviewer will be the WLD Governance Officer.

3
Click  next to the Review Topic field.
 
4
a) Search for the Review Topic and press Enter. The Review topic will be Request for Variation.

b) Click the required option in the Value field.
5
Enter Comments as needed. 

6
a) Click  (Save).


Note: This will now appear in the Start Centre of the assigned Reviewer.

b) Click Start Centre to return to your front dashboard.



7
End of Section 6 work instruction.





















Section 7  – Close Scoping Work Order and deliverable
Prerequisite activities
• WLD Governance has reviewed and approved project proposal and moved the project status to ‘Approved’.
• The Service Provider has completed scoping work and all costs have been attributed to scoping work order.
• Scoping work order and deliverable are in a status of ‘In Progress’. These were changed by either the Project Initiator Governance or the Service Provider.

Step
Action
1
Navigate to the Scoping Work Orders as per Section 1 instructions.
2
a) Click Common Action>Change Status to display the Change Status window.

3
a) Click the dropdown list next to the New Status field, select ‘Practical Completion’.

b) Click OK to change the status.

4
Repeat steps 2 & 3 to change the status to ‘Costs Approved for Distribution’ and click OK.

Note: Ensure all scoping invoices and labour costs have been attributed to the work orders and all labour entries have been approved before changing the status to ‘Costs Approved for Distribution’.

5
Click  (Chevron) next to the Project field and click Go To Projects to navigate to the project.

6
Navigate to the Project Deliverables section and click  (Change Status) next to the execution deliverable status.

7
Select the New Status of ‘Complete’ and click OK.

Note: Scoping work order must be in a status of ‘Cost Approved for Distribution’ in order to change the deliverable status.

Note: If the project doesn’t proceed, any scoping deliverables created will still need to be changed to a status of ‘Complete’ and any related execution work orders must be cancelled. 
If any scoping costs have been added, the scoping work order must follow the work order life cycle.

8
End of Section 7 work instruction.




















Section 8 – Update Execution Work Order, Execution deliverable and Project status
Prerequisite activities
• WLD Governance has changed the project status to ‘Approved’.
• The Service Provider has generated the execution work order and moved it to a status to ‘Waiting to be scheduled’.
• Execution deliverable has been created and is in a status of ‘Ready’.

Step
Action
1
Navigate to the Execution Work Order as per Section 1 instructions.
2
From the Main tab, scroll down to the Scheduling Information section and use  (calendar icon) to update the Scheduled start  and Scheduled finish dates if required.


3
Click Select Action>Change Status to display the Change Status window.

4
a) Click the dropdown list next to the New Status field, select ‘Scheduled’.
b) Click OK to change the status. 


5
a) Navigate to the Responsibility section and populate the Lead field.
Field
Action
Lead
Enter the Project Manager

b) Click  (Chevron) next to the fields to select a value.


6
Repeat steps 3 & 4 to change the status to ‘In Progress’ and click OK.

7
Click  (Chevron) next to the Project field and select Go To Projects.

8
Navigate to the Project Deliverables section and click  (Change Status) next to the execution task status to display the Change Deliverable Status window.



9
Select the New Status of ‘In Progress’ and click OK.


10
Repeat steps 3 & 4 to change the project status to ‘In Progress’ and click OK.


11
End of Section 8 work instruction.




Section 9 – Request AKS to register procured and built assets
Prerequisite activities
• Registration of assets may only be required for some WLD projects.
• The Service provider has completed execution works.
• Assets have been procured or built which need to be registered in Maximo. The Asset Knowledge & Systems (AK&S) team will undertake the Maximo registration process, after receiving a request from the Service Provider.
• The Service provider will email all requests for asset and location bulk uploads to IT Support as needed. AK&S will manage all requests for data updates through the IT Support console.

Step 
Action
1
Navigate to the Project as per Section 1 instructions.
2
From the Project, click the Review and Endorse tab.

3
Navigate to the Reviewers section and click New Row.


4
Enter the Reviewer name or click  (Chevron) next to the field to choose from value list.  
Note: The Reviewer will be an AK&S data team member. Refer to the Asset Data Intranet page for contact details.

5
Click  next to the Review Topic field and select value ‘As Cons’ (ASCONS)’


6
Enter comments as needed. 


7
Click  (Save).
Note: This will now appear in the Start Centre of the assigned Reviewer.

8
End of Section 9 work instructions




Section 10 – Request Endorsement of Project Handover
Prerequisite activities
• The Service Provider has moved the execution work order (s) to a status of ‘In Progress’.
• All physical work has been executed.
• The procured assets information has been provided as needed.
• A PC walk has been completed by Service Provider and required stakeholders as needed.

Step 
Action
1
Navigate to the Project as per Section 1 instructions.
2
From the Project, click the Review and Endorse tab.

3
Navigate to the Reviewers section and click New Row.


4
Enter the Reviewer name or click  (Chevron) next to the field to choose from value list.


Note: The Reviewer will be your Minor Capital Team Leader. They will act in the role of Governance at this point.

5
Click  (Search) next to the Topic field and select HANDREQ (Handover Request).


6
Enter comments as needed.
 
7
Click  (Save).

Note: WLD Governance will receive an automated email advising there is a project to endorse. It will also appear in their Start Centre under the Projects I need to endorse table. Governance will then undertake project handover using the checklist attached to the project.

Note: Once the project has been endorsed, WLD Governance will move the project status to ‘Practically Complete’. 
The ‘Defect Liability Period’ will then commence, if required.

8
End of Section 10 work instruction.



Section 11 – Close Execution Work Order (s) and Execution Deliverables
Prerequisite activities
• Execution deliverables and work orders can be completed at any stage during project delivery, once work is completed.
• Once the project handover has been completed, the Service Provider will close any remaining execution work order (s) and execution deliverables.
• Handover of project has been reviewed and endorsed.
• After any applicable defect liability periods, WLD Governance will move the project status to ‘Complete’
• Ensure all costs have been attributed to the work orders before moving the status to ‘Commercially Complete’.

Step 
Action
1
Navigate to the Execution Work Order as per Section 1 instructions.
2
Click Change Status or click  (Change Status) to display the Change Status window.
 
3
a) Click the dropdown list next to the New Status field, select ‘Practical Completion’.
b) Click OK to change the status.


Note: Once a work order has been moved to status of ‘Practical Completion’ the Actual Finish Date field on the work order populates.

Note: Ensure all execution invoices and labour costs have been attributed to the work orders. All labour entries must be approved.

4
Repeat steps 2 & 3 to change the status to ‘Commercial Completion’ and click OK. 

Note:	No further costs can be added to the Work Order in this status.
5
Click  (Chevron) next to the Project field and click Go To Projects to navigate to the project.

6
Project Manager will navigate to the Project Deliverables section and click  (Change Status) next to the execution deliverable status.
 
7
Select new status of ‘Complete’ and click OK.

Note:	All execution work orders must be in a status of ‘Commercial Completion’ to allow the deliverables to be completed.
8
End of work instruction.

Document Controls 
Role
Name
Author
Allison O’Brien
Reviewer
Stuart Smith, Ross Bleazby
Approver/ Owner
Kristina Sestokas


Document History
[Only add details of previous two versions]
Date
Reviewed/ Actioned By
Version
Action










Deliver Minor Capital Project – Waterways and Land
Work Instructions



Doc Name: CORP WI Deliver Minor Capital Project – Waterways and Land
Author: Stuart Smith 
Version: 1.0
Page 2 of 51
Approver: Kristina Sestokas
Doc ID 50865815: 
Document Uncontrolled if Printed
Approved: Dec/2018





AM WI Govern Minor Capital Project -Wholesale Services

Table of Contents
1.	Purpose	1
2.	Scope	1
3.	Prerequisite Activities	1
4.	Roles	1
5.	Navigate Maximo Projects and WO Tracking Module	3
6.	Assign Governance Officer and Review Project Detail	8
7.	Create Scoping Deliverable and Generate Scoping WO	9
8.	Update Scoping Deliverable and Project Status	17
9.	Endorse Project Proposal and Capture Variations	20
10.	Endorse Project Handovers	26
11.	Update Project Status	28
12.	Cancel, Close or Complete a Project	30
13.	Document History 	35

1. Purpose
The purpose of this Work Instruction is to provide users with the steps to govern a project within the Wholesale Services domain through the Project and WO Tracking modules in Maximo.
2. Scope
This document relates to the governance of projects in Maximo.
3. Prerequisite Activities
• Project has been created and approved in Project Online.
• Project has been created in Maximo and is in a status of ‘Scoping’.
4. Roles
Role
Responsibility
Project Initiator
Creates project in Project Online. Reviews and updates project in Maximo. 
Governance Team
Manage the effective delivery of the Minor Capital Program
Governance Officer
Approve projects for scoping, release and completion. Review project functional requirements, project proposals, handover requirements to ensure project objectives have been met.
Operations/Stakeholders
Review Functional Requirements and liaise with Service Provider for handover requirements.
Service Provider
The team that will execute the works on the ground. In the context of Maximo instructions, this is either Waterways and Land Delivery (WLD) or Wood. Creates execution deliverables and work orders as required.



5. Navigate Maximo Projects and WO Tracking Module
5.1 To Access a Project via the Start Centre
1
Log into Maximo and click the Project Governance Start Centre tab.


1. 
Note:	The Start Centre displays various tables of projects and/or work order in various stages of the lifecycle.

2
Navigate to the relevant table and click any Project or Work Order Number.
Note:	This will open the Project or Work Order in the Main tab.
• 
3
End




5.2 To Access a Project via the Go To Menu

1
Use the Go To menu in the navigation toolbar, select Work Orders > Projects.

Enter the Project Number in the Find field.

Press Enter (or click ) to open the Project in the Main tab.
2
End




5.3 To Access a Work Order via the Go To Menu
1
Click the Go To menu and select Go To>Work Orders> Work Order Tracking (HSE)

Type the work order number in the Find field and press Enter (or click ) to perform the search.

Note:	The work order displays in the Main tab. This will retrieve only that specific work order.

2
Alternatively, you can access all work orders related to a project in the WO Tracking (HSE) module.
Use the scroll bar at the bottom of the screen to scroll far right to the Project field.

Type the project number in the Project field and press Enter.

Note:	This displays all work orders related to the specific project number.
Click the required work order number. 

Note:	The work order displays in the Work Order tab.

3
End




5.4 To Navigate from a Project to Related Work Orders
1
From the Main Project tab, click the Cost Details tab.


2
Scroll down to the Work Orders section.
Click  (Chevron) next to the work order number you want to navigate to.
Click Go to WO Tracking (HSE).

Note:	The work order displays in the WO Tracking (HSE) Module in the Main tab.

3
End.



6. Assign Governance Officer and Review Project Detail
Prerequisite activities:
• Project has been created and approved in Project Online.
• Project initiator has moved project to a status of ‘Scoping’.
Step 
Action
1
Navigate to the Project using Section 1 instructions.
2
Navigate to the Responsibility section.
Populate the Governance Officer Field. 

Click  (Save ) to save changes made.
3
Scroll to the right and confirm the Service Provider value is correct.

4
End




7. Create Scoping Deliverable and Generate Scoping WO
Prerequisite activities:
• A project has been created in Project Online and is in a status of ‘Scoping’.
• The Service Provider has been confirmed.

Step 
Action
1
Navigate to the Project as per Section 1 instructions
2
Use the Go To menu in the navigation toolbar, select Work Orders > Projects.

3
Enter the Project Number number in the Find field.

Press Enter (or click ) to open the Project in the Main tab.

4
Create project scoping deliverable
In the Main tab, scroll down to the Project Deliverables section and click New Deliverable. 
	
5
Populate the following fields in the Project Deliverable Information section.

Field
Action
Project Deliverable Description
This is the description that best suits the task
Deliverable Type
Select ‘SCOPING’.
Activity
Select from a set list of activities. 
Note: This field isn’t mandatory but good practice to populate. 
Project Deliverable Allocation
Enter the total amount specific for that deliverable. 
Note: The amount must allow provision for management fees and profit but exclude GST. 
This field isn’t mandatory.
Target Start
The earliest date that any Work Order can start.
Note: SPs cannot start works before this date.
Target Finish date
When the Work Order absolutely must be completed (e.g. may be due to Regulatory requirement, seasonal requirement). 

Click  (Save)



Note:	The deliverable status will default to ‘READY’.


6
Create scoping work orders
From the Main tab, click the Select Action> Generate Work Orders.

7
Tick the checkbox on the left hand side of the deliverable number to select the deliverable requiring a work order creation.
Note:	Multiple deliverables can be selected at the one time, but only one work order can be generated per deliverable each time.
Click Generate WO. 

Note:	This generates a work order for each deliverable selected.
Note:	The second section of the Generate Work Orders screen will show any work orders previously generated for each deliverable. 
Check the work orders already created to avoid raising duplicate WOs.



8
A system message displays, showing the work order numbers created from the project deliverable(s).

Click OK to close the message.
9
Click on the Cost Details tab to display the generated work orders.


Under the Work Orders section, click  (Chevron) next to the Work Order number and select Go to WO Tracking (HSE). 

Note:	This opens the relevant work order in the Work Order Tracking module. The work order will be in a status of ‘Draft’.

10
Populate the following fields in the Work Order tab:

Note: Some fields will auto-poulate based on the relationship between data fields in Maximo.
Field
Action
Work Order Description
This field will auto-populate based on the deliverable description. It can be updated if required.
Service Contract
Select the contract number of the service provider.
Service Provider
This field will auto-populate based on the Service Contract.
Service Provider Division
Select the division of the Service Provider that will undertake scoping work.
Responsible Party
Select your responsible party group. This will be the ‘Wood Project Group’.
Activity
Select the most appropriate activity from the pick list for the works.
Discipline
Select the discipline that best suits the type of project.
Contracted Priority
This is the KPI priority/response time of the work order. 
Always select L4 for any project related work order.
SP Notified Date
Enter the date the Service Provider is to be notified of the work order. 
Note: This will default to the Now date and time if date isn’t selected using the calendar icon.
Target Start Date
This field will auto-populate based on the SP Notified Date and the Contracted Priority, according to the pre-determined KPI business rules.
Target Finish Date
Enter the date for scoping works to finish.
Scheduled Start
Enter the date for scoping works to commence. 
Scheduled Finish
Enter the date for scoping works to finish. 


Note:	Click  (Chevron) next to each field to see options. 





11
Click Select Action>Change Status or click  (Change Status) to display the Change Status window. 

12
Click the dropdown list next to the New Status field, select ‘Estimate and Plan’.
Click OK to change the status.

13
Navigate to the Estimates and Actuals section on the work order.
Tick the checkbox next to the Use Manual Estimates? field.
Enter the estimate value in the Manual Estimate field.
Click  (Save).

14
Repeat steps 11 & 12 to change the status to‘Waiting on Approval’ and click OK.

15
Repeat steps 11 & 12 to change the status to ‘Waiting to be Scheduled’ and click OK.
16
End




8. Update Scoping Deliverable and Project Status
Prerequisite activities:
• The Governance Officer has created a scope deliverable.
• The Governance Officer has generated a scoping work order. and moved it to a status of ‘Waiting to be scheduled’.

Step 
Action
1
Navigate to the Project using Section 1 instructions.
2
Navigate to the Project Deliverables and click  (Change Status) next to the scoping task status to display the Change Deliverable Status window.

3
Select the New Status of ‘In Progress’ and click OK.

Note:	The Deliverable status will show as ‘INPRG’. 



4
Click Select Action>Change Status or click  (Change Status) to display the Change Status window.

5
Click the dropdown list next to the New Status field, select ‘Project in Estimation’.
Click OK to change the status. 

6
Navigate to the Review and Endorse tab.

7
Navigate to the Reviewers section and click New Row.

Enter the Reviewer name or click  (Chevron) next to the field to choose from value list.

Note: The ‘Reviewer’ will be the Service Provider Area Lead.

8
Click  next to the Review Topic field.

Select value of ‘SCOPINGREL’ (Scoping Released).

9
Enter comments as needed. 

10
Click  (Save).

Note: This will now appear in the Start Centre of the assigned Reviewer.

11
End



9. Endorse Project Proposal and Capture Variations
Prerequisite activities:
• The Governance Officer has moved the project status to ‘Project in Estimation’.
• The Service Provider has completed scoping activities.
• The Service Provider has develop project proposal and attached to the project in Maximo.
• The Service Provider has moved scoping work order to a status of ‘Practical Completion’.
• The Service Provider has submitted an endorse request in the Project.

Step
Action
1
Navigate to the Project as per Section 1 instructions.
2
Accessing project attachments
From the Main tab, click  (Attachment icon) in the top right corner.
Note:	The View Attachments window displays with all project attachments.
Click the document number link to view the project proposal attachment.

Note:	The document will then open in a separate window.
Click OK to close the View Attachments window.

3
To
Action
Endorse project proposal.
Go to step 4
Request a variation from Project Initiator as proposal value exceeds P95 value or scope requires changes for ‘unapproved’ project.
Go to step 5
Create an execution release entry.
Go to step 12
Review and endorse variation request for ‘approved’ project.
Go to step 17


4
Endorsing a project proposal
Navigate to the Review and Endorse tab.

To accept project proposal, tick the checkbox in the Endorsers section and click Save.

Note:	Maximo will automatically send an email to the Service Provider advising their project proposal has been endorsed.

5
Requesting a variation for unapproved project
Navigate to the Review and Endorse tab. 

6
Enter the Reviewer name or click  (Chevron) next to the field to choose from value list.

Note: The ‘Reviewer’ will be the Project Initiator.

7
Click  next to the Review Topic field

Select value of ‘REQVARN’.

8
Enter comments as needed.

9
Click  (Save).

Note: This will now appear in the Start Centre of the assigned Reviewer.

10
Approving a project
Click Select Action>Change Status or click  (Change Status) to display the Change Status window.

11
Click the dropdown list next to the New Status field, select ‘Approved’.
Click OK to change the status. 

Note: Ensure any variation requests have been reviewed and endorsed before moving project status to ‘Approved’.

12
Creating execution release entry
Navigate to the Review and Endorse tab.

13
Navigate to the Reviewers section and click New Row.

Enter the Reviewer name or click  (Chevron) next to the field to choose from value list.

Note: The ‘Reviewer’ will be the Service Provider Area Lead.

14
Click  next to the Review Topic field.

Select value of ‘EXECREL’ (Execution Released).

15
Enter comments as needed.

16
Click  (Save).

Note: This will now appear in the Start Centre of the assigned Reviewer.
17
Accepting ‘review’ variation request from Service Provider
Navigate to the Review entry generated by the Service Provider.
Tick the Reviewed? checkbox.

Click  (Save).

Accepting ‘endorse’ variation request from Service Provider
Navigate to the Endorse entry generated by the Service Provider.
Tick the Endorsed? checkbox.

Click  (Save).
18
End




10. Endorse Project Handovers
Prerequisite activities:
• The Service Provider has added a review and endorse entry in the Project for handover.
• Physical installation and execution work has been completed on ground.
• Asset information has been provided to AK&S where needed.
• The Service Provider has moved the project status to ‘In Progress’.

Step 
Action
1
Navigate to the project as per Section 1 instructions.
2
Accessing project attachments
From the Main tab, click  (Attachment icon) in the top right corner.
Note:	The View Attachments window displays with all project attachments.
Click the document number link to view the handover checklist.

Note:	The document opens in a separate window.
Click OK to close the View Attachments window.
3
Complete the handover checklist and save as an attachment to the project.
From the Main tab, click  (Attachment icon) in the top right corner to attach the project proposal.
Click Add New Attachment then Add new Web Page.

Paste in the URL Link.
Type in the document name.


4
Navigate to the Review and Endorse tab.


5
To accept project handover, tick the checkbox in the Reviewers section and click Save.

6
End 




11. Update Project Status
Prerequisite activities
• The Service Provider has moved all project deliverables into a status of ‘Complete’.
• The Service Provider has closed all scoping and execution work orders with all relevant costs attributed. Note: the project status can be moved to ‘Practically Complete’ without all costs attributed.
• Governance has reviewed project handover.
• All project artefacts and asset information has been provided to AK&S.

Step 
Action
1
Navigate to the project as per Section 1 instructions.
2
Click Select Action>Change Status or click  (Change Status) to display the Change Status window.


3
Click the dropdown list next to the New Status field, select ‘Practically Complete’.
Click OK to change the status. 

Note:	Costs can still be attributed after the project has been moved to ‘Practically Complete’.

4
Repeat steps 2 & 3 to change the status to ‘Defect Liability Period’ and click OK.


5
Once defect liability period has ended, repeat steps 2 & 3 to change the status to ‘Complete’ and click OK.

Note:	The Final Cost Reporting process is completed in Project Online.

6
End




12. Cancel, Close or Complete a Project
Maximo Projects are cancelled, closed or completed due to the following:
Cancelled: A project which was found to be not required or non-viable prior to expenditure being incurred

• Closed: A project which will not be completed which was found to be not required or non-viable after expenditure occurred
 
• Completed: All activities relating to the project have completed, including all Asset information management, and the project defects liability period (if applicable) has ended.
Prerequisite activities:
• To cancel a Project all Work Orders (if any) must be in a status of ‘cancelled’
• To close or complete a Project all Work Orders must be in a status of ‘cost approved'
• To close or complete a Project all Deliverables must be in a status of ‘complete’ 

Step 
Prerequisite  – Cost Approve a Work Order
1
Navigate to the required project as per Section 1 instructions.
2
From the project, click on the Cost Details tab to review the Work Order details 

3
Click the chevron on the required Work Order to navigate to Work Order Tracking

4
From Work Order Tracking click Common Actions > Change Status or click  (Change Status) to display the Change Status window.

Update WO status → INPROGRESS to PRACCOMP and then COSTAPPR. 

Click OK
Note: Work Orders will be automatically be closed after 90 days

5
After cost approving any outstanding Work Orders relating to the project,

email Asset Capital Accounting with the relevant OpEx code to have costs returned 

Step 
Prerequisite  – Complete Project Deliverables
6

Return to the Project and click on the Main tab 


7
Scroll to Project Deliverables and click  (Change Status) to display the Change Status window 

Update the status to Complete
Click OK

Step 
Complete, Cancel or Close Project 
8
Click Common Actions>Change Status or click  (Change Status) to display the Change Status window.

Click the dropdown list next to the New Status field, select ‘Cancelled, Closed or Complete’.

Note: Project status flow:
Hold > roll back to Scoping > Draft > Cancelled
Hold > roll back to Scoping > Project in Estimation > Closed
Scoping> Project in Estimation >Approved >In Progress> Practically Complete > Completed

Refer to the Project Status Flow Chart for more details.
Click OK to change the status.
9
After completing the steps in Maximo, the following actions are required to be performed by Project Managers for Project Online.
Cancelling a project in Maximo will not update the project in Project Online, the project will still appear active. Project Owners need to complete a Change Request (approved in accordance with DoA) to have the Project Cancelled in Project Online. 
Closing a project in Maximo will not update the project in Project Online, the project will still appear active. Project Owners need to complete a Change Request (approved in accordance with DoA) to have the project Closed in Project Online. 
​Completing a project in Maximo will trigger completion of the Project in Project Online. 
For more information about Project Online requirements refer to the PMO Knowledge Centre.
10
The following actions are required to be performed by Project Managers for Tech One.
After completion of tasks in Project Online for Cancelled/Closed/Completed Projects, please email Asset Capital Accounting with the Project number and the change in status so it will be reflected in TechOne. Note that this will lock the PAT codes under the project number and no further invoices will be processed by the system.

End 




13. Document History 
Date
Reviewed/
Actioned By
Version
Action
April 2021
System ＆ Documentation Specialist
7
Annual review
May 2020
System ＆ Documentation Specialist
6
Added Section 8, annual review




AM WI Govern Minor Capital Project -Wholesale Services
Work Instruction





Doc ID: 50868564
Page 1 of 35
Version: 7
Date: 04/2021
Doc Name: AM WI Govern Minor Capital Project
Author: Systems & Documentation Specialist
Approver: AK&T Team Lead
Document uncontrolled if printed








AM WI Govern Minor Capital Project -Wholesale Services
Work Instruction





Doc ID: 50868564
Page 26 of 35
Version: 7
Date: 04/2021
Doc Name: AM WI Govern Minor Capital Project
Author: Systems & Documentation Specialist
Approver: AK&T Team Lead
Document uncontrolled if printed


AM WI Minor Capital Govern Project WLD

Table of Contents
1.	Purpose	1
2.	Scope	1
3.	Prerequisite Activities	1
4.	Roles	1
5.	Navigate Maximo Projects and WO Tracking Module	3
6.	Assign Governance Officer and Review Project Detail	8
7.	Create Scoping Deliverable and Generate Scoping WO	9
8.	Update Scoping Deliverable and Project Status	17
9.	Endorse Project Proposal	21
10.	Endorse Project Handover	29
11.	Update Project Status	31
12.	Tier 0.1 Review and Endorse Project	33
13.	Tier 0.1 Update Execution Work Order Status	34
14.	Cancel, Close or Complete a Project	35
15.	Document History 	39

1. Purpose
The purpose of this Work Instruction is to provide users with the steps to govern a project within the Waterways and Land domain through the Project and WO Tracking modules in Maximo.
2. Scope
This document relates to the governance of projects in Maximo.
3. Prerequisite Activities
• Project has been created and approved in Project Online.
• Project has been created in Maximo and is in a status of ‘Scoping’.
4. Roles
Role
Responsibility
Project Initiator
Creates project in Project Online. Reviews and updates project in Maximo. 
Governance Officer
Approve projects for scoping, release and completion. Review project functional requirements, project proposals, handover requirements to ensure project objectives have been met.
Operations/Stakeholders
Review Functional Requirements and liaise with Service Provider for handover requirements.
Service Provider
The team that will execute the works on the ground. In the context of Maximo instructions, this is either Waterways and Land Delivery (WLD) or Wood. Creates execution deliverables and work orders as required.



5. Navigate Maximo Projects and WO Tracking Module
5.1 To Access a Project via the Start Centre
1
Log into Maximo and click the Project Governance tab.

1. 
Note:	The Start Centre displays various tables of projects and/or work order in various stages of the lifecycle.

2
Navigate to the relevant table and click any Project or Work Order Number.
2. 
Note:	This will open the Project or Work Order in the Main tab.
• 
3
End




5.2 To Access a Project via the Go To Menu
1

Use the Go To menu in the navigation toolbar, select Work Orders > Projects.

Enter the Project Number in the Find field.

Press Enter (or click ) to open the Project in the Main tab.
2
End




5.3 To Access a Work Order via the Go To Menu
1
Click the Go To menu and select Go To>Work Orders> Work Order Tracking (HSE).

Type the work order number in the Find field and press Enter (or click ) to perform the search.

Note:	The work order displays in the Main tab. This will retrieve only that specific work order.

2
Alternatively, you can access all work orders related to a project in the WO Tracking (HSE) module.
Use the scroll bar at the bottom of the screen to scroll far right to the Project field.

Type the project number in the Project field and press Enter.

Note:	This displays all work orders related to the specific project number.
Click the required work order number. 

Note:	The work order displays in the Work Order tab.

2
End




5.4 To Navigate from a Project to Related Work Orders
1
From the Main Project tab, click the Cost Details tab.

2
Scroll down to the Work Orders section.
Click  (Chevron) next to the work order number you want to navigate to.
Click Go to WO Tracking (HSE).

Note:	The work order displays in the WO Tracking (HSE) Module in the Main tab.

3
End.



6. Assign Governance Officer and Review Project Detail
Prerequisite activities:
• Project has been created and approved in Project Online.
• Project initiator has moved project to a status of ‘Scoping’.

Step 
Action
1
Navigate to the Project using Section 1 instructions.
2
Navigate to the Responsibility section.
Populate the Governance Officer field. Use the magnifying glass to choose the correct value. 

Click  (Save ) to save changes made.
3
Confirm the Service Provider value is correct.

4
End 



7. Create Scoping Deliverable and Generate Scoping WO
Prerequisite activities:
• A project has been created in Project Online and is in a status of ‘Scoping’.
• The Service Provider has been confirmed.

Step 
Action
1
Navigate to the Project as per Section 1 instructions.
2
Create project scoping deliverable
In the Main tab, scroll down to the Project Deliverables section and click New Deliverable. 
	
3
Populate the following fields in the Project Deliverable Information section.

Field
Action
Project Deliverable Description
This is the description that best suits the task, e.g. 
Deliverable Type
Select ‘SCOPING’.
Activity
Select from a set list of activities. 
This field isn’t mandatory but good practice to populate. 
Project Deliverable Allocation
Enter the total amount specific for that task. 
Note: The amount must allow provision for management fees but exclude GST. This field isn’t mandatory.
Target Start
The earliest date that any Work Order can start.
Note: The SPs cannot start works before this date.
Target Finish date
When the Work Order absolutely must be completed (e.g. may be due to Regulatory requirement, seasonal requirement). 

Click  (Save ).


Note:	The deliverable status will default to ‘READY’.



4
Create scoping work orders
From the Main tab, navigate to More Actions > Generate Work Orders.

5
Check the deliverable number requiring a work order creation.

Click Generate WO. 
Note:	This generates a work order for each deliverable selected.
Note:	The second section of the Generate Work Orders screen will show any work orders previously generated for each deliverable. Check the work orders already created to avoid raising duplicates.
Note:	Multiple deliverables can be selected at the one time, but only one work order can be generated per deliverable each time.

6
A system message displays, showing the work order numbers created from the project deliverable(s).

Click OK to close the message.
7
Click on the Cost Details tab to display the generated work orders.


Under the Work Orders section, click  (Chevron) next to the Work Order number and select Go to Work Order Tracking (HSE). 

Note:	This will open the relevant work order in the Work Order Tracking module. The work order will be in a status of ‘Draft’.

8
Populate the following fields in the Work Order tab:

Note: Some fields will auto-poulate based on the relationship between data fields in Maximo.
Field
Action
Work Order Description
This field will auto-populate based on the deliverable description. It can be updated if required.
Service Contract
Select the contract number of the service provider.
Service Provider
This field will auto-populate based on the Service Contract.
Service Provider Division
Select the division of the Service Provider that will undertake scoping work.
Responsible Party
Select the group ultimately responsible for works. This will be the ‘WLID Project Group’.
Activity
Select the most appropriate activity from the pick list for the works. 
Discipline
Select the discipline that best suits the type of project
Contracted Priority
This is the KPI priority/response time of the work order. 
Always select L4 for any project related work order.
SP Notified Date
Enter the date the Service Provider is to be notified of the work order. 
Note: This will default to the Now date and time if date isn’t selected using the calendar icon.
Target Start Date
This field will auto-populate based on the SP Notified Date and the Contracted Priority, according to the pre-determined KPI business rules.
Target Finish Date
Enter the date for scoping works to start.
Scheduled Start
Enter the date for scoping works to commence. 
Note: The Service Provider can update as required.
Scheduled Finish
Enter the date for scoping works to finish. 
Note: The Service Provider can update as required.




Note:	The ‘Target Start’ date is auto-populated based on the ‘SP Notified Date’ and the ‘Contracted Priority’ value.

9
Navigate to the left hand menu, click Common Actions>Change Status to display the Change Status window.

10
Click the dropdown list next to the New Status field, select ‘Estimate and Plan’.
Click OK to change the status.

11
Navigate to the Estimates and Actuals section on the work order.
Tick the checkbox next to the Use Manual Estimates? field.
Enter the estimate value in the Manual Estimate field.

Click  (Save).
12
Repeat steps 10 & 11 to change the status to ‘Waiting on Approval’ and click OK.

13
Repeat step 10 & 11 to change the status to ‘Waiting to be Scheduled’ and click OK.
14
End 




8. Update Scoping Deliverable and Project Status
Prerequisite activities:
• The Project Initiator has moved the project to a status of ‘Scoping’.
• The Project Initiator Governance Officer has created a scope deliverable.
• The Project Initiator Governance Officer has generated a scoping work order and moved it to a status of ‘Waiting to be scheduled’.

Step 
Action
1
Navigate to the project using Section 1 instructions.
2
Navigate to the Project Deliverables and click  (Change Status) next to the scoping task status to display the Change Deliverable Status window.

3
Select the New Status of ‘In Progress’ and click OK.

Note:	The Deliverable status will show as ‘INPRG’. 

4
Click Common Actions>Change Status or click  (Change Status) to display the Change Status window.

5
Click the dropdown list next to the New Status field, select ‘Project in Estimation’.
Click OK to change the status. 
6
Navigate to the Review and Endorse tab.

7
Navigate to the Reviewers section and click New Row.

Enter the Reviewer name or click  (Chevron) next to the field to choose from value list.

Note: The ‘Reviewer’ will be the Service Provider Design and Estimation Lead (DEL)

8
Click  next to the Review Topic field.

Select value of ‘SCOPINGREL’ (Scoping Released).

9
Enter comments as needed. 

10
Click  (Save).
Note: This will now appear in the Start Centre of the assigned Reviewer.

6
End 




9. Endorse Project Proposal
Prerequisite activities:
• Governance Officer has moved the project status to ‘Project in Estimation’.
• The Service Provider has completed all scoping activities.
• The Service Provider has developed the project proposal and attached to the project in Maximo.
• The Service Provider has moved scoping work order to a status of ‘Practical Completion’.
• The Service Provider has submitted an endorse request in the Project.

Step
Action
1
Navigate to the Project as per Section 1 instructions.
2
Accessing project attachments
From the Main tab, click (Attachment icon) in the top right corner.
Note:	The View Attachments window displays with all project attachments.
Click the document number link to view the project proposal attachment.

Note:	The document will then open in a separate window.
Click OK to close the View Attachments window.

3
To
Action
Endorse project proposal
Go to step 4
Request a variation from Project Initiator as proposed value exceeds P95 value or scope requires changes for ‘unapproved’ project
Go to step 5
Approve a project
Go to step 10
Create ‘Execution Release’ entry
Go to step 12
Review variation request for ‘approved’ project and send to Project Initiator for endorsement.
Go to step 17
Accept ‘Review’ request for variation from Service Provider.
Go to step 22


4
Endorsing a project proposal
Navigate to the Review and Endorse tab.

To accept project proposal, tick the checkbox in the Endorsers section and click Save.

Note:	Maximo will automatically send an email to the Service Provider advising their project proposal has been endorsed.

5
Requesting a variation for unapproved project
Navigate to the Review and Endorse tab. 

6
Enter the Reviewer name or click  (Chevron) next to the field to choose from value list.

Note: The ‘Reviewer’ will be the Project Initiator.

7
Click  next to the Review Topic field.

Select value of ‘REQVARN’.

8
Enter comments as needed.

9
Click  (Save).

Note: This will now appear in the Start Centre of the assigned Reviewer.

10
To approve a project
Click Select Action>Change Status or click  (Change Status) to display the Change Status window.

11
Click the dropdown list next to the New Status field, select ‘Approved’.
Click OK to change the status. 

Notes:
The person with the correct Delegations of Authority must change the status of the Project to Approved in Maximo. This ensures alignment with Project Online Delegations of Authority,
The amount in the Approved Value (P95) Field is the amount synched to Project Online as the BCA P95
12
Creating execution release entry
Navigate to the Review and Endorse tab.

13
Navigate to the Reviewers section and click New Row.

Enter the Reviewer name or click  (Chevron) next to the field to choose from value list.

Note: The ‘Reviewer’ will be the Service Provider Project Manager.

14
Click  next to the Review Topic field.

Select value of ‘EXECREL’ (Execution Released).

15
Enter comments as needed.

16
Click  (Save).

Note: This will now appear in the Start Centre of the assigned Reviewer.

17
Requesting a variation for an approved project
Navigate to the Review and Endorse tab.

18
Navigate to the Endorsers section and click New Row.
		
Enter the Endorser name or click  (Chevron) next to the field to choose from value list.

Note: The ‘Endorser’ will be the Project Initiator.

19
Click  next to the Endorse Topic field.

Select value of ‘REQVARN’.

20
Enter comments as needed.

21
Click  (Save).

Note: This will now appear in the Start Centre of the assigned Endorser.

22

Note: Once variation is approved in Project Online, Project initiator will tick Endorse checkbox in Maximo Project. Governance will tick the Review checkbox in Maximo Project.
Navigate to the Review entry generated by the Service Provider.
Tick the Reviewed? Checkbox.

Click  (Save).
23
End




10. Endorse Project Handover
Prerequisite activities:
• The Service Provider added a review and endorse entry in the Project for handover.
• Physical execution work has been completed on ground.
• Asset information has been provided to AK&S where needed.
• The Service Provider has moved the project status to ‘In Progress’.

Step
Action
1
Navigate to Project using Section 1 instructions.
2
Accessing project attachments
From the Main tab, click (Attachment icon) in the top right corner.
Note:	The View Attachments window displays with all project attachments.
Click the document number link to view the handover checklist.

Note:	The document will then open in a separate window.
Click OK to close the View Attachments window.
3
Complete the handover checklist and save as an attachment to the project.
From the Main tab, click (Attachment icon) in the top right corner to attach the project proposal.
Click Add New Attachment then Add new Web Page

Copy and paste the Inflo link into the Specify the URL field. 
Enter a name for the file in Name the document field.

Click OK. 

4
Navigate to the Review and Endorse tab.


5
To accept project handover, tick the checkbox in the Reviewers section and click Save.

6
End 




11. Update Project Status
Prerequisite activities
• Governance has reviewed and endorsed the project proposal.
• The Project status is ‘Project in Estimation’.
• The Service Provider has generated execution work orders in a status of ‘Waiting for Approval’.
Step 
Action
1
Navigate to the Project as per Section 1 instructions.
2
Click Select Action>Change Status or click  (Change Status) to display the Change Status window.


3
Click the dropdown list next to the New Status field, select ‘Practically Complete’.
Click OK to change the status. 

4
Repeat steps 2 & 3 to change the status to ‘Defect Liability Period’ and click OK.


5
Once the defect liability period has ended, repeat steps 2 & 3 to change the status to ‘Complete’ and click OK.


6
End




12. Tier 0.1 Review and Endorse Project
Prerequisite activities:
• The Project Initiator has created project and move to a status of ‘Approved’.
• The Project initiator has requested review and endorse through Maximo.

Step 
Action
1
Navigate to the project as per Section 1 instructions.
2
Navigate to the Review and Endorse tab.


3
Approve a review and endorse
Tick the box Reviewed and/or Endorsed on the topic assigned to you.  


Click  (Save ) to save changes made.

Note:	There is no mechanism to “reject” the request in Maximo. 
If the parties decide the project should not proceed, the project must be “cancelled”.

4
End 




13. Tier 0.1 Update Execution Work Order Status
Prerequisite activities:
• The Project initiator has generated execution work order and it is in a status of ‘Estimate and Plan’. 
• The Service Provider has added quotation and manual estimate and moved work order to status of ‘Waiting Approval’.

Step 
Action
1
Navigate to the project as per Section 1 instructions.
2
Click Select Action>Change Status or click  (Change Status) to display the Change Status window.


3
Click the dropdown list next to the New Status field, select ‘Waiting to be Scheduled’.
Click OK to change the status.


4
End 




14. Cancel, Close or Complete a Project
Maximo Projects are cancelled, closed or completed due to the following:
• Cancelled: A project which was found to be not required or non-viable prior to expenditure being incurred
• Closed: A project which will not be completed which was found to be not required or non-viable after expenditure occurred
• Completed: All activities relating to the project have completed, including all Asset information management, and the project defects liability period (if applicable) has ended.
Prerequisite activities:
• To cancel a Project all Work Orders (if any) must be in a status of ‘cancelled’
• To close or complete a Project all Work Orders must be in a status of ‘cost approved’ 
• To close or complete a Project all Deliverables must be in a status of ‘complete’ 

Step 
Prerequisite  – Cost Approve a Work Order
1
Navigate to the required project as per Section 1 instructions.
2
From the project, click on the Cost Details tab to review the Work Order details 

3
Click the chevron on the required Work Order to navigate to Work Order Tracking

4
From Work Order Tracking click Common Actions > Change Status or click  (Change Status) to display the Change Status window.

Update WO status → INPROGRESS to PRACCOMP and then COSTAPPR. 

Click OK
Note: Work Orders will be automatically be closed after 90 days

5
After cost approving any outstanding Work Orders relating to the project, email Asset Capital Accounting with the relevant OpEx code to have costs returned 
Step 
Prerequisite  – Complete Project Deliverables
6
Return to the Project and click on the Main tab 

7
Scroll to Project Deliverables and click  (Change Status) to display the Change Status window 

Update the status to Complete
Click OK
Step 
Complete, Cancel or Close Project 
8
Click Common Actions>Change Status or click  (Change Status) to display the Change Status window.

Click the dropdown list next to the New Status field, select ‘Cancelled, Closed or Complete’.
Note: Project status flow:
Hold > roll back to Scoping > Draft > Cancelled
Hold > roll back to Scoping > Project in Estimation > Closed
Scoping> Project in Estimation >Approved >In Progress> Practically Complete > Completed

Refer to the Project Status Flow Chart for more details.
Click OK to change the status.
9
After completing the steps in Maximo, the following actions are required to be performed by Project Managers for Project Online.
Cancelling a project in Maximo will not update the project in Project Online, the project will still appear active. Project Owners need to complete a Change Request (approved in accordance with DoA) to have the Project Cancelled in Project Online. 
Closing a project in Maximo will not update the project in Project Online, the project will still appear active. Project Owners need to complete a Change Request (approved in accordance with DoA) to have the project Closed in Project Online. 
​Completing a project in Maximo will trigger completion of the Project in Project Online. 
For more information about Project Online requirements refer to the PMO Knowledge Centre.
10
• The following actions are required to be performed by Project Managers for Tech One.
• After completion of tasks in Project Online for Cancelled/Closed/Completed Projects, please email Asset Capital Accounting with the Project number and the change in status so it will be reflected in TechOne. Note that this will lock the PAT codes under the project number and no further invoices will be processed by the system.

End




15. Document History 
Date
Reviewed/
Actioned By
Version
Action
April 2021
System & Documentation Specialist
8
Annual review
June 2020
System & Documentation Specialist
7
Added Steps to cancel, close or complete project




AM WI Minor Capital Govern Project WLD
Work Instruction





Doc ID: 50874752
Page 2 of 39
Version: 8
Date: 04/2021
Doc Name: AM WI Minor Capital Govern Project WLD
Author: System & Documentation Specialist
Approver: AK&T Team Lead
Document uncontrolled if printed








AM WI Minor Capital Govern Project WLD
Work Instruction





Doc ID: 50874752
Page 28 of 39
Version: 8
Date: 04/2021
Doc Name: AM WI Minor Capital Govern Project WLD
Author: System & Documentation Specialist
Approver: AK&T Team Lead
Document uncontrolled if printed




Minor_Capital_Handover

1. Purpose

To describe steps to create and process a Minor Capital Project Handover within Maximo.

2. Scope

This document relates to determine and enter the project Deliverables within the Maximo Interface

3. Instruction

Before you start you will need to identify the following Information:

• Any Existing drawings impacted by the project

• Any Existing O&M Manuals impacted by the project

• If any Drawings are to be created the EPMS LOC Code

4. Creating High Level Requirement List

Review the categories in the Appendix 1 form and fill out wherever they are applicable for the project.

5. Entering the Deliverables in the Project

Open the Project Details Tab,



In the Deliverables Box click New Row,



Then click on the Select the applicable Category and Sub Category,



Enter a comment and details as required to articulate the deliverable,

Repeat for each deliverable Item,

Submit a drawing reservation request to AK&T (if required).

6. Reviewing Handover Request

When notified by the service provider (Endorsement for HANDREQ) that the project has reached practical completion.

Review each of the deliverable Items including:

• Asset Data, Manufacturer, Model, Serial Number and other relevant Asset Attributes

• Location information, Service Address, Map Reference, and Service Provider

• O&M Manual

• Location Hierarchy

• As Constructed Drawings - if satisfied that they represent the current physical state of the assets and locations; send through to AK&S Data Team for storage in EPMS and capture in GIS.

Refer back to the Service Provider for remediation or update the information as appropriate.

When satisfied that the deliverables have been achieved, mark any other project deliverables except drawings as Accepted with the relevant check Box. The AK&S data team will check the Drawings Handover box after the drawings have been validated and data has been captured in the GIS and Maximo



If the O&M manual is acceptable Open the Assets Module, and navigate to the relevant Asset. Load the O&M Manual into the Asset Attachments, set as do not print with Work Order.



Store any other relevant information as appropriate in Inflo

7. Accept the Handover

Once all deliverables have been accepted, go to the project Review and Endorse Tab and check the Endorsed check Box.



8. Document History

Date

Reviewed/ Actioned By

Version

Action

June 2017

Senior Asset Practitioner

1

First published version

April 2021

Systems & Documentation Specialist

3

Annual review







Appendix 1: Handover Requirement Checklist

Category

Category Description

Sub Category

Required

Y/N

AMS

Asset Management System Key Deliverable



 





Development of Commissioning Plan

 





As Constructed Information (Drawings Including P & IDs)

 





O&M Manual (New or Revised)

 





Completed Asset ID Template

 





Installation of Asset ID & Equipment Labels

 





List of Spare Parts Required

 





List of Special Tools & Equipment

 





Control System Control Narrative Development

 





Development of Standard Maintenance Instruction

 





RCM Review

 

PTD

Project / Technical Deliverable



 





Preliminary Design Sketch

 





Engineering Design and / or Calculation

 





Development of Inspection Test Plan

 





QA (e.g. Equipment Certification etc.)

 





PLC Program Lodged with Control Systems Team

 





RTU Program

 





Training of Operations Personnel

 





Training of Maintenance Personnel

 





Development of Standard Operating Procedure

 





Mapping Outputs

 

RA

Risk Assessment



 





HAZOP (Post Design Stage)

 





HAZID (Post Implementation)

 





CHAZOP (if Applicable)

 





Project Risk Assessment

 





Hazardous Area Dossier Updated

 

OTHER

Other Deliverable



 

PMSCHED

Preventative Maintenance 

Schedule

 

 









Minor Capital Handover

Work Instruction











Doc ID: 39270684

Page 4 of 5

Version: 3

Date: 04/2021

Doc Name: AM WI Minor Capital Handover

Author: Systems and Documentation Specialist

Approver: AK&T Team Lead

Document uncontrolled if printed






AM WI Minor Capital Initiate (Tier 0.1) Project

Table of Contents
1.	Purpose	1
2.	Scope	1
3.	Prerequisite activities	1
4.	Roles	1
5.	Navigate Maximo Projects and WO Tracking Modules	3
6.	Review Project Details from Project Online	8
7.	Update Project Details in Maximo	12
8.	Send Project to Governance for Approval	18
9.	Create Project Execution Deliverable	20
10.	Generate an Execution Work Order	23
11.	Review Deliverables and Close Project	31
12.	References	34
13.	Document History 	34

1. Purpose
The purpose of this Work Instruction is to provide users with the steps for an initiator to deliver a Tier 0.1 Project through the Project and WO Tracking modules in Maximo.
2. Scope
This document relates to the initiation and execution of Tier 0.1 projects in Maximo 
3. Prerequisite activities
Project has been created in Project Online (P3i).
4. Roles and Responsibilities
Role
Responsibility
Project Initiator
Creates project in Project Online. Reviews and updates project in Maximo. Acts as Project Manager for the Project. Create execution deliverables and work orders. Forecasts costs with Governance team.
Governance Team
Review Suitability for Tier 0.1 Delivery.
Governance Officer
Approve Tier 0.1 Projects for Delivery, coordinate forecast data.
Service Provider
The team that will execute the works on the ground. In the context of Maximo instructions, this is either Waterways and Land Delivery (WLD) or Wood. 
Operations
Review Functional Requirements and liaise with Service Provider for handover requirements.

To
Go to
Navigate Maximo Projects and WO Tracking module
• To access a Project via the Start Centre
• To access a Project via the Go To Menu
• To access a Work Order via the Go To menu
• To navigate from a Project to related work orders
Section 5
Review Project Details from Project Online
Section 6
Update Project Details in Maximo
Section 7
Send Project to Governance for Approval
Section 8
Create Project Execution Deliverable
Section 9
Generate an Execution Work Order
Section 10
Review Deliverables and Close Project
Section 11




5. Navigate Maximo Projects and WO Tracking Modules
To access a project via the Start Centre
1
Log into Maximo and click the Project Initiator Start Centre tab.

Note:	The Start Centre displays various tables of projects and/or work order in various stages of the lifecycle.
2
Navigate to the relevant table and click any Project or Work Order Number.
Note:	This opens the Project or Work Order in the Main tab.
•  




To access a Project via the Go To Menu
1
Use the Go To menu in the navigation toolbar, select Work Orders > Projects.

Enter the Project Number in the Find field.

Press Enter (or click ) to open the Project in the Main tab.




To access a Work Order via the Go To menu
1
Click the Go To menu and select Go To>Work Orders> Work Order Tracking (HSE)

Type the work order number in the Find field and press Enter (or click ) to perform the search.

Note:	The work order displays in the Main tab. This will retrieve only that specific work order.
2
Alternatively, you can access all work orders related to a project in the WO Tracking (HSE) module.
Use the scroll bar at the bottom of the screen to scroll far right to the Project field.

Type the project number in the Project field and press Enter.

Note:	This displays all work orders related to the specific project number.
Click the required work order number. 

Note:	The work order displays in the Work Order tab.




To navigate from a Project to related work orders
1
From the Main Project tab, click the Cost Details tab.

2
Scroll down to the Work Orders section.
Click  (Chevron) next to the work order number you want to navigate to.
Click Go to WO Tracking (HSE).

Note:	The work order displays in the WO Tracking (HSE) Module in the Main tab.




6. Review Project Details from Project Online
6.1 Prerequisite Activities
• A project has been created and approved in Project Online.
• A project has been created in Maximo and is in a status of ‘Draft’.
Step 
Action
1
Use the Go To menu in the navigation toolbar, select Work Orders > Projects.

2
Enter a project number in the Find field.

Press Enter (or click ) to open the Project in the Main tab.
3
Confirm the following fields are correct: Project number, Project Description, Budget and GL Account.
Note:	Suggested naming convention for Project Description:
Financial Year – Location – Activity (e.g. 17/18 – Merri Creek – Revegetation)

4
Confirm Project Type.

Note:	The Project Status will be ‘DRAFT’.
5
Confirm the following fields are correct: Budget Status, Budget Type and Budget Open/Close Dates.


6
Confirm the Service Provider field is correct.

Note: The Project Manager value is populated from Project Online. 
7
Review the following fields in the Project Dates section.

Note:	The mandatory fields are represented with * (an asterisk). The project cannot be saved unless all mandatory fields have been populated
8
Navigate to the Financial tab.

9
Navigate to the Project Funding section.
Confirm the following fields are correct:
• Initial Estimate and Approved Value.
Maximo field
Equivalent Project Online field
Initial Estimate
P50 at Business Needs Identifier stage (BNI)
Approved Value
P95 at Business Case Approval (BCA) stage

Note:	All fields must allow provision for management fees and profit but exclude GST.

10
Go to Section 7




7. Update Project Details in Maximo
7.1 Prerequisite Activities
• Initiator has reviewed project detail populated from Project Online.
Step
Action
1
Navigate to your project using the Section 5 instructions.
2
Populate the following fields in the Main tab.
Field
Action
Product
Select the MW Product Line this project is supporting.
Business Driver
Select the business driver for the project.
Financial Year
Select the financial year the major expenditure will occur within.
Activity
Select an Activity that describes the Project.
Water Plans
Select the Water Plan the project will be delivered within.
Delivery Mechanism
Select Delivery mechanism ESP0.1
Ultimate Asset Owner
Select the final owner of the asset.



Note:	For Tier 0.1 Projects, the Delivery Mechanism will always be ESP0.1
(i.e. simple maintenance like projects where design and quotes are not required).
3
• Navigate to the Responsibility section.
• Confirm the Initiator Officer field.
• Add yourself as the Project Manager.
• Add your one up manager as the Delivery Officer.
• Populate the Governance Team field.



Note:	For Tier 0.1 Projects, the Project Manager will be the project initiator’s name.
4
To add any further project documentation:
• Click (Attachment icon) in the top right corner.
• Go to Attachments > Add New Attachments >Add New Web Page.


5
• Copy and paste the Inflo link into the Specify the URL field. 
• Enter a name for the file in Name the document field.
• Click OK.

6
Navigate to the Financial tab.

Under the Project Funding section, update SP quote to current expected costs for program of works.

 

Note: The SP Quote value will be updated to the P50 (Initial Estimate) value for the project in Project Online when the project status is moved to ‘Approved’.
7
Navigate to the Multi Assets/Locations tab.

8
Click New Row and add the primary site facility/location to the project.


9
Navigate to the Related Records tab to define any related service request records.

10
Click New Row to define any related service request records.
 
11
Enter the service request number if known or click  (Chevron) next to the Related Record Key field and click Select Value.

Use the search fields to search for the related service request, click Enter to perform search.

12
Click the Ticket value to select the service request.

Note:	The ticket populates the Related Record Key field. The other fields will auto-populate based on the service request detail.

13
End




8. Send Project to Governance for Approval
8.1 Prerequisite Activities
• The project initiator has created a Project in Maximo and is in a status of ‘Draft’.
• All relevant Project data has been updated.
Step
Action
1
Navigate to your project.
2
Click Select Action>Change Status or click  (Change Status) to display the Change Status window. 

3
Click the dropdown list next to the New Status field, select ‘Waiting For Concept Approval’.
Click OK to change the status.

Note:	If the project was found not to be required or non-viable prior to any expenditure has been incurred, change the project status to “Cancelled’.
4
Repeat steps 2 and 3 to change the status to ‘Scoping’ and click OK.

7
Go to Section 9




9. Create Project Execution Deliverable
9.1 Prerequisite Activities
• A project has been created in Maximo and the Governance Officer has moved to a status of ‘Approved’. This is approval for execution expenditure (Business Case Approval)
Step
Action
1
Navigate to your project. 
2
From the Main tab, navigate to the Project Deliverables section.Click New Deliverable.
 

3
Create project execution deliverables 
Populate the following fields in the Project Deliverable Information section.
Field
Action
Project Deliverable Description
Enter a description for the task based on the following format:
Location ID – Work Order Description. (e.g. ETP – Renewals)
Deliverable type
Select ‘EXECUTION’.
Deliverable Type Allocation
• The total amount specific for that task. 
Note: The amount must allow provision for management fees and profit but exclude GST.
Target Start
• The earliest date that any Work Order can start. 
• Note: SPs cannot charge works before this date.
Target Finish date
When the Work Order absolutely must be completed (e.g. may be due to Regulatory requirement, seasonal requirement). 



Note:	The deliverable status will default to a status of ‘READY’.

4
Repeat step 3 for each project execution deliverable.
5
Navigate to the Multi Assets/Locations tab.

6
Click New Row and add the relevant asset number for each of the deliverables. 

Use the   (Chevron) to search for asset number.


Note: A capital investment can only be made on an asset. The deliverables list must match up with the asset list of that the Final Cost Reporting/Asset registration piece can be completed correctly.
7
Go to Section 10




10. Generate an Execution Work Order
10.1 Prerequisite Activities
• The project is in a status of 'Approved’.
• Project initiator has created execution deliverables.

Step
Action
1
Navigate to your project
2
Click Select Action>Generate Work Orders .

3
Tick the check box on the left hand side of the deliverable number to select the deliverable requiring a work order creation.
Note:	Multiple deliverables can be selected at the one time.
Click Generate WO. 

Note:	This generates a work order for each deliverable selected.
4
A system generated message displays, showing the work order numbers created from the project deliverable(s).

Click OK to close the message.
5
Click the Cost Details tab to view the related work orders.

Under the Work Orders section, click  (Chevron) next to the Work Order number and select Go to WO Tracking (HSE). 

Note:	This opens the relevant work order in the Work Order Tracking module.
6
Populate the following fields in the Work Order tab:
Field
Action
Work Order Description
This field will auto-populate based on the deliverable description. This can be updated if required.
Long Description
Detailed requirements, specifications for the work to be undertaken, as per a normal breakdown or corrective Work Order.
Asset
Enter the asset number that this Work Order relates to.
Service Contract
Select the contract number of the service provider.
Service Provider
This field will auto-populate based on the Service Contract.
Service Provider Division
Select the division of the Maintenance Service Provider Division that will undertake the work.
Responsible Party
Select your responsible party group. 
Activity
Select the most appropriate activity from the pick list for the works.
Discipline
Select the discipline that best suits the type of project.
Contracted Priority
This is the KPI priority/response time of the work order. 
Always select L4 for any project related work order.
SP Notified Date
Enter the date the Service Provider is to be notified of the work order. 
Note: This will default to the Now date and time if date isn’t selected using the calendar icon.
Target Start Date
This field will auto-populate based on the SP Notified Date and the Contracted Priority, according to the pre-determined KPI business rules. This can be adjusted if required.
Target Finish Date
Enter the date for execution works to finish.
Scheduled Start
Enter the date for execution works to commence. This will be adjusted by the Servicer Provider during scheduling.
Scheduled Finish
Enter the date for execution works to finish. This will be adjusted by the Service Provider during scheduling.
Manual Estimate
Estimate of the costs of the work order. This should include direct costs, management services and fee.






7
Attaching relevant documentation
Go to Attachments > Add New Attachments >Add New File.

8
Click Browse to add the file from its saved location (e.g. your local drive).
Click OK.

9
Click Select Action>Change Status or click  (Change Status) to display the Change Status window.

Click the dropdown list next to the New Status field, select ‘Estimate and Plan’.
Click OK to change the status.


Creating a manual estimate
Navigate to the Estimates and Actuals section.
Click the Use Manual Estimates? checkbox.

Note:	The Manual Estimate field will now be enabled.

Enter the cost in the Manual Estimate field of the work order and click  (Save) located at the top of the menu.
 

Note: This estimate should include direct costs, management services and fee.
12
Click  (Chevron) next to the Project field and select Go To Projects.

13
Navigate to the Project Deliverables section and click  (Change Status) next to the execution deliverable status to display the Change Deliverable Status window.

14
Select the New Status of ‘In Progress’ and click OK.

15
Change the project status
Scroll to the top of the page and click Select Action>Change Status or click  (Change Status) to display the Change Status window.

16
Select New Status of ‘In Progress’ and click OK.

17
End




11. Review Deliverables and Close Project
11.1 Prerequisite Activities
• The Execution deliverables and work orders have been created and moved to a status of ‘In Progress’.
• All works on ground have been completed
Note: Review and Endorse function can be used to guarantee correct level of Governance.
Step
Action
1
Navigate to the execution work order as per Section 5 instructions.
2
Click  (Chevron) next to the Project field and click Go To Projects to navigate to the project.

3
Navigate to the Project Deliverables section and click  (Change Status) next to the execution deliverable status.

4
Select status of ‘Complete’ and click OK.

Note:	All execution work orders must be in a status of ‘Commercial Completion’ to allow the deliverables to be completed.
5
To complete the project, navigate to the top of the screen and click Select Action>Change Status or click  (Change Status) to display the Change Status window.

6
Click the dropdown list next to the New Status field, select ‘Practically Complete’.
Click OK to change the status. 

7
Register any new Assets not already registered by the Service Provider, add all assets related to the project to the Multi Asset Tab of the project.
8
FCR Project in accordance with CORP CW P123 Final Cost Reporting/Asset_ Capitalisation
9
Repeat step 6 and select New Status of ‘Defect Liability Period’ and click OK.

10
Repeat Step 6 and select New Status of ‘Closed’.
Click OK to change the status.

11
End of work instruction.




12. References
Resource Document
Inflo Link
Project Online Work Instructions (Knowledge Centre)
Project Online Work Instructions
Definitions List
http://inflo/inflo/llisapi.dll/open/42485513
Inflo work instructions
http://inflo/inflo/llisapi.dll/open/42865123 
Work Order Status flow chart
http://inflo/inflo/llisapi.dll/open/42979090 
Integration Field Mapping
http://inflo/inflo/llisapi.dll/open/43343003
Project Status definitions
http://inflo/inflo/cs.exe/Open/55032228
Project Status Flow Chart 
http://inflo/inflo/cs.exe/open/55250409
13. Document History 
Date
Reviewed/
Actioned By
Version
Action
July 2020
System & Documentation Specialist
34
Links and screens added, template updated. 




AM WI Minor Capital Initiate (Tier 0.1) Project
Work Instruction





Doc ID: 39701527
Page 21 of 34
Version: 34
Date: 07/2020
Doc Name: AM WI Minor Capital Initiate (Tier 0.1) Project
Author: System & Documentation Specialist
Approver: AK&T Team Lead
Document uncontrolled if printed



AM WI Minor Capital Initiate Project

Table of Contents
1.	Purpose	1
2.	Scope	1
3.	Prerequisite Activities	1
4.	Roles	1
5.	Integration Field Mapping (Project Online to Maximo)	3
6.	Review Project Details from Project Online (P3i)	4
7.	Update Project Details In Maximo	9
8.	Change Project Status to ‘Scoping’ or ‘Cancelled’	14
9.	Create a Scope Deliverable and Update Deliverable Status	16
10.	Generate a Scope Work Order	19
11.	References	26
12.	Document History 	26

1. Purpose
The purpose of this work instruction is to provide users with the steps on how to initiate and update a minor capital project through the Project and WO Tracking modules in Maximo.
2. Scope
This document relates to the initiation and updating of minor capital projects in Maximo before they move to a Governance or Service Provider team.
3. Prerequisite Activities
• Project has been created in Project Online (P3i).
• Relevant drawings and standards have been identified.
4. Roles
Role
Responsibility
Project Initiator
Creates project in Project Online. Reviews and updates project in Maximo. For Waterways and Land, the Project Initiator will also create scope deliverable and work order.
Changes the project status to ‘Scoping’.
Governance Team
Manage the effective delivery of the Minor Capital Program
Governance Officer
Approve projects for scoping, release and completion. Review project functional requirements, project proposals, handover requirements to ensure project objectives have been met.
Service Provider
The team that will execute the works on the ground. In the context of Maximo instructions, this is either Waterways and Land Delivery (WLD) or Wood. Create execution deliverables and work orders.
Operations
Review Functional Requirements and liaise with Service provider for handover requirements.




5. Integration Field Mapping (Project Online to Maximo)
Project Online field
Maximo field
Project ID
Project
Name
Long Description
Owner
Project Manager
Maximo Service Provider
Service Provider
Inflo Functional Specification Title
Attachments
Workspace Folder URL
URL
Project Status
Status
Project Type
Project Type
Budget
Budget
GL Account
GL Account
P50
Initial Estimate
P50
SP Quote (after BCA approval)
P95
Approved Value
BCA Approval Gate
Endorsed Date
Project Allocation
Project Allocation
BCA Approver
Endorser Name
Maximo Actual Start Date
Actual Start Date
Maximo Actual Practical Completion Date
Actual Practical Completion Date
Maximo Actual Finish Date
Actual Finish
Maximo Target Start Date
Target Start Date
Maximo Target Practical Completion Date
Target Practical Completion
Maximo Target Finish Date
Target Finish Date



6. Review Project Details from Project Online (P3i)
Prerequisite activities:
• The ‘Project Initiator’ has created a project in Project Online.
• A project has been created in Maximo and is in a status of ‘Draft’.

Step 
Action
1
Log into Maximo and click on the Project Start Centre tab.


2
Scroll down to the My draft projects section.

3
Click the Project Number to display the project in the Projects Module.

4
Alternatively, use the Go To menu in the navigation toolbar, select Work Orders > Projects.

5
a) Enter the project number in the Find field.


b) Press Enter to open the Project in the Main tab.
6
Confirm the following fields are correct: Project, Project Description, Budget and GL Account. 
Note: Suggested naming convention for Project Description: Financial Year – Location – Activity (e.g. 17/18 – Merri Creek – Revegetation)

7
Confirm the Status and Project Type. 



Note:	The project status defaults to ‘DRAFT’.
8
Confirm the following fields are correct: Budget Status, Budget Type and Budget Open/Close Dates.

9
Confirm the Service Provider field is correct.


Note: The Project Manager value is populated from Project Online. This can be updated by the Service Provider as required.
10
Review the following fields in the Project Dates section.

11
View project attachments
a) Click (Attachment icon) in the top right corner.

Note:	The View Attachments window displays with all project attachments.
b) Click the document number link to view the attachment.

Note:	The document displays in a separate window.
c) Click OK to close the View Attachments window.
12
Navigate to the Financial tab. 

13
a) Navigate to the Project Funding section.
b) Confirm the following fields are correct:
Project Allocation, Initial Estimate and Approved Value. 

 
Note: The Allowed Provision field can be left with the value of 0.00 and updated at a later date as needed.

14
Go to Section 7




7. Update Project Details In Maximo
Prerequisite activities:
• The project initiator has created a project in Project Online and project detail has been reviewed.
• The project is the status of ‘Draft’.

Step
Action
1
Populate the following fields in the Main tab.
Field
Action
Product
Select the MW Product Line this project is supporting.
Business Driver
Select the business driver for the project.
Financial Year
Select the financial year the major expenditure will occur within.
Activity
Select an Activity that describes the Project.
Water Plans
Select the Water Plan the project will be delivered within.
Delivery Mechanism
Select how the project will be delivered.
Ultimate Asset Owner.
Select the final owner of the asset.





2
Note:	The mandatory fields are represented with * (an asterisk). The project cannot be saved unless all mandatory fields have been completed. 
Navigate to the Responsibility section.
Populate the following fields: Responsible Party, Initiator Officer and Governance Team.


Note: For Waterways and Land, the Governance team at this stage of the project is the ‘Project Initiator Governance’. The can be updated at a later stage as required.
3
To add any further project documentation:
a) Click (Attachment icon) in the top right corner.
b) Go to Attachments > Add New Attachments >Add New Web Page.

4
a) Copy and paste the Inflo link into the Specify the URL field. 
b) Enter a name for the file in Name the document field.
c) Click OK.

5
Navigate to the Multi Assets/Locations tab.


6
Click New Row.

Enter the Asset Number or Location or click  (Chevron) next to the field to select a value from list.
        



Click the Asset number value from the list.
Note: The Asset Number field auto-populates the Location and Location Description fields.


7
Repeat step 6 to add multiple assets or locations as needed.




8. Change Project Status to ‘Scoping’ or ‘Cancelled’ 
Prerequisite activities:
• The ‘Project Initiator’ has updated the project details and project is in a status of ‘Draft’. 
• The ‘Project Initiator’ will now change the project status to ‘Scoping’ to allow scoping works to commence. 
Note: After this section, the ‘Governance Officer’ will move the project through the life cycle for Wood projects. 

Step
Action
1
Click Select Action>Change Status or click  (Change Status) to display the Change Status window.


2
Click the dropdown list next to the New Status field, select ‘Waiting For Concept Approval’.
Click OK to change the status.


Note:	If the project was found not to be required or non-viable prior to any expenditure has been incurred, change the project status to ‘Cancelled’.
3
Repeat steps 1 & 2 to change the status to ‘Scoping’ and click OK.


Note:	The project will appear in the Governance Officer’s Start Centre in the table labelled ‘Projects for Scoping’.

4
End




Note: The next 2 sections are for Waterways and Land only.
9. Create a Scope Deliverable and Update Deliverable Status
Prerequisite activities:
• The ‘Project Initiator’ has updated the project details and moved the project to a status of ‘Scoping’.

Step
Action
1
Use the Go To menu in the navigation toolbar, select Work Orders > Projects.

2
Enter the Project Number in the Find field.

Press Enter (or click ) to open the Project in the Main tab.
3
In the Main tab, scroll down to the Project Deliverables section and click New Deliverable. 
	
4
Enter a Project Deliverable description.
Select Deliverable Type of ‘Scoping’.
Enter target start and finish dates.
Click  (Save ).





Note:	The deliverable status defaults to ‘READY’.


5
Click  (Change Status) next to the scoping task status to display the Change Deliverable Status window.

6
Select the New Status of ‘In Progress’ and click OK.

Note:	The Deliverable status displays as ‘INPRG’. 


7
End





10. Generate a Scope Work Order
Prerequisite activities:
• The ‘Project initiator’ has updated the project and moved it into a status of ‘Scoping’.
• The ‘Project initiator’ has created a scope deliverable and is in a status of ‘Ready’.

Step
Action
1
From the Main tab, click the Select Action> Generate Work Orders.


2
Review the Work Orders Generated Previously for Deliverable section to ensure there hasn’t been work orders already generated.


3
Tick the checkbox on the left hand side of the deliverable number to select the deliverable requiring a work order creation.

Note:	Multiple deliverables can be selected at the one time.

Click Generate WO. 


Note:	This generates a work order for each deliverable selected.

4
A system message displays, showing the work order numbers created from the project deliverable(s). 
Click OK to close this window.

5
Click the Cost Details tab to display the generated work orders.


Under the Work Orders section, click  (Chevron) next to the Work Order number and select Go to WO Tracking (HSE). 


Note:	This will open the relevant work order in the Work Order Tracking module. The work order will be in a status of ‘Draft’.
6
Populate the following fields in the Work Order tab: 

Field
Action
Work Order Description
This field will auto-populate based on the deliverable description. It can be updated if required.
Location
Select the location for the work order.
Asset
Select the asset number for the work order. 
Note: This field might auto-populate based on the Maximo location relationship.
Service Contract
Select the contract number of the service provider (WLID-WC01).
Service Provider
This field will auto-populate based on the Service Contract.
Service Provider Division
Select the division of the Service Provider that will undertake scoping work.
Responsible Party
Select your reps party group.
Activity
Select the relevant activity for the works.
Discipline
Select the discipline that best suits the type of project.
Contracted Priority
This is the KPI priority/response time of the work order. 
Always select L4 for any project related work order.
SP Notified Date
Enter the date the Service Provider is to be notified of the work order. 
Note: This will default to the Now date and time if date isn’t selected using the calendar icon.
Target Start Date
This field will auto-populate based on the SP Notified Date and the Contracted Priority, according to the pre-determined KPI business rules.
Scheduled Start
Enter the date for scoping works to commence.
Note: The Service Provider can update as required.
Scheduled Finish
Enter the date for scoping works to finish.
Note: The Service Provider can update as required.
Execution Approval Group
If required by contract or business process, select the group that has approval for the work to be undertaken.



Note:	Click  (Chevron) next to each field to see options. 






Note:	The ‘Target Start’ date is auto-populated based on the ‘SP Notified date’ and the ‘Contracted Priority’ value.

Note:	The Execution Approval Group field is located under the Responsibility section.
7
Once all mandatory work order fields have been populated, click  (Save).
8
Click Select Action>Change Status or click  (Change Status) to display the Change Status window. 

9
Click the dropdown list next to the New Status field, select ‘Estimate and Plan’.
Click OK to change the status.


10
Navigate to the Estimates and Actuals section on the work order.
Tick the checkbox next to the Use Manual Estimates? field.
Enter the estimate value in the Manual Estimate field.
Click  (Save).

11
Repeat steps 8 & 9 to change the status to ‘Waiting on Approval’ and click OK.

12
Repeat steps 8 & 9 to change the status to ‘Waiting to be Scheduled’ and click OK. 
Note:	The Service Provider will receive the work order in this status. They will update the work order, the deliverable status, the project status and undertake scoping works. 
13
End




11. References
Resource Document
Inflo Link
Project Online Work Instructions (Knowledge Centre). 
Project Online Work Instructions
Detailed Project Online Work Instructions  
http://inflo/inflo/cs.exe/properties/43714612
Inflo work instructions
http://inflo/inflo/llisapi.dll/open/42865123 
Definitions List
http://inflo/inflo/llisapi.dll/open/42485513
CORP AM WI Minor Capital Handover
http://inflo/inflo/cs.exe/properties/39270684
COPR CW P027 – Contract Delivery Strategy
http://inflo/inflo/cs.exe/open/4860114
CORP GOV Guidance 
Note: Enjoying Nature and Recreation Facilities
http://inflo/inflo/cs.exe/properties/41284693
Project Status definitions
http://inflo/inflo/cs.exe/Open/55032228
Project Status Flow Chart 
http://inflo/inflo/cs.exe/open/55250409
12. Document History 
Date
Reviewed/
Actioned By
Version
Action
July 2020
System & Documentation Specialist
37
Links and screens added, template updated. 
April 2021
System & Documentation Specialist
39
Annual review




AM WI Minor Capital Initiate Project
Work Instruction





Doc ID: 38784094
Page 1 of 26
Version: 39
Date: 07/2020
Doc Name: AM WI Minor Capital Initiate Project
Author: System & Documentation Specialist
Approver: AK&T Team Lead
Document uncontrolled if printed



Vent Tube Replacement Work Instruction

Purpose

The purpose of this Work Instruction is to outline the requirements for undertaking repairs of vent stacks and replacement of vent tubes and sealant. This will ensure inspections, repairs, reporting and storage of data is carried out in a consistent manner.

Scope

This document relates to standard vents associated with the Sewerage Transfer network and applies to repairs and replacement only. Vent tube replacement, repairs and reporting requirements shall be in accordance with this instruction.



Safety

All work shall be carried out in accordance with all relevant OH&S Acts, Regulations, Codes of Practice and Melbourne Water OH&S policies and procedures with particular reference to:



• CORP H&S 053 - Management of Confined Space Entry

o CORP H&S 053.8 - Confined Space Sewerage

o CORP H&S 053.10 - Confined Space Drainage

• CORP H&S 008 Task Risk Assessments

• CORP H&S 036 - Personal Protective Equipment

• CORP H&S 038 - Safety Equipment Procedure

• CORP H&S 050 - Manual Handling and Ergonomics

• CORP H&S 058 - Management of Sharps 

• CORP H&S 061 - Traffic Management

• Road Management Act 2004 

o Code of Practice Worksite Safety – Traffic Management (2010)

• CORP H&S 062 - Fall Prevention

• CORP H&S 064 - Permit to Work

• CORP H&S 068 - Biological Hazards

• CORP H&S 075 - Fatigue Management            



A Preliminary Hazard Identification assessment has been completed to support the service provider in preparing their Safe Work Method Statement (SWMS).



Quality

All work shall be carried out in accordance with the Contractors approved Quality Plan and any additional requirements relating to quality or materials specified in this maintenance instruction.



Environment

All works shall be carried out in accordance with all relevant Environmental Acts and Regulations, including Melbourne Water requirements with particular reference to:

• Odour and Noise management

• CORP H&S 072 Waste Disposal 



Cultural Heritage

At no time should ground disturbance or excavation occur during the work, without the prior written approval from Melbourne Water. All works shall be carried out with appropriate control measures to protect and preserve Cultural Heritage as advised by Melbourne Water in accordance with all Cultural Heritage Acts and Regulations. Melbourne Water’s Cultural Heritage Contingency Plan is to be carried with the crew and be available on site.





Instruction

1. Planning

a) It is the responsibility of the service provider to understand site conditions related to access to the vent and manhole cover. The following information may be used as a guide to assist with planning the survey:



• Melbourne Water’s Spatial information (GIS)



• Cultural heritage overlays for area of sensitivity buffer (GIS)



• Melbourne Water’s EPMS for design and as-constructed drawings of the assets



a) Where safe and practical to do so, consideration for site pre-inspections to assist with understanding site conditions to enable efficient delivery



b) The contractor shall schedule works with minimal disruption or interference and shall consider as a minimum, the following in determining timing:



• Traffic conditions



• Residential, commercial and industrial areas



• Access to private property



• Public nuisance, noise and odour



a) A permit application is to be made to the Integrated Control Centre (ICC) or Regional Teams providing a minimum 5 business days’ notice



b) During replacement activities if the vent stack, or any equipment used in its replacement, will exceed the minimum specified clearance distance to overhead power lines, contact the relevant power company to isolate any applicable power lines



c) Notify local residents via letter drop:



• Five (5) days prior to any work that requires access to private property or that will restrict resident access



• Three (3) days prior to any work that must be undertaken at night



d) The service provider shall make all reasonable attempts to re-schedule the vent replacement upon receipt of any requests or complaints received as a result of the communication



e) Completing any additional required notifications as advised by Melbourne Water



f) Where assets are located within trafficable areas, preparing Traffic Management Plans and obtaining approvals from the relevant authority (E.g. VicRoads) prior to the commencement of works



g) Emergency works are exempt from advance notifications as per 1.5









2. Vent Tube Replacement

The work to be completed under this work order includes:



a) Implementation and management of all necessary traffic and/or pedestrian/cyclists controls where applicable



b) Removal of existing vent tube and disposal to an approved recycling, transfer or landfill site



c) The replacement vent tube (refer Melbourne Water Standard Drawing C 6.099.03. 2) is to be galvanized in accordance with AS/NZS 4680– Hot-dip galvanized (zinc) coatings on fabricated ferrous articles



d) Painting of the galvanized vent tube and base, with the colour to match the damaged vent stack. Surface preparation and paint application is to be in accordance with Water Services of Australia, WSA 201–2017, Manual for selection and applications of protective coatings. The following coating systems for each component of the ventilation stack are outlined in Table 1.



Table 1: Summary of the coating systems recommended for ventilation stack tube and base

Component

WSA 201 Coating System

Galvanized vent tube internal coating

High build epoxy, solvent based for immersion service (8.10 EHB-SB) or 



High build epoxy, solvent free for immersion service (8.11 EHB-SF)

Galvanized vent tube external coating



New

High performance polyurethane (8.24 PUR-A)

Touch up

Acrylic latex (8.1 ACL)

Vent base internal repair coating

Epoxy mastic, surface tolerant (8.12 EMP)

Vent base external coating



Major repair

High performance polyurethane (8.24 PUR-A)

Touch up

Acrylic latex (8.1 ACL)

Detailed information about each system, including surface preparation is included in Appendix A.



e) Install replacement vent tube using padded slings. Take care not to damage paint work.



f) Installation of the replacement tube attachments, with ventilation cap or cowl to match the damaged ventilation stack.



g) Sealing of the vent tube/vent base interface, in accordance with Figure 1:



• Install rubber ring (nominal 20 mm diameter, size to fit)



• Install oiled hemp cord packing



• Solvent wipe to remove all oil from faces to receive sealant



• Install bond breaker tape, as recommended by manufacturer



• Apply sealant (Emer-Seal® PU40, Emer-Seal® CR or equivalent), with an appropriate primer installed as recommended by manufacturer. Ensure a sealant width to depth ratio of 2:1, nominally 12 to 15 mm deep. Note: a joint filler or backing rod may also be required and installed as recommended by the manufacturer.



h) Cleaning and greasing of the manhole gatic cover.



i) Supply and management of any labour, plant and materials required to complete the works.



Stakeholder Consultation 

Alan Mizzi –Western Region Supervisor – Wood 





Document History

Date

Reviewed/ Actioned By

Version

Action

Feb 2018

H.Aitken

1.0

Replacement document for retired SMI

Feb 2018

E.Bourke

2.0

Added to Control Library

Updated footer with Doc ID and version number







Appendix A – Specific Information for Coating Systems 

Table 2: Coating systems recommended for ventilation stack tube and base

Component

WSA 201 Coating System

Galvanized vent tube internal coating

High build epoxy, solvent based for immersion service (8.10 EHB-SB) 

Surface preparation:

Sweep (brush) blast clean or lightly roughen, using a fine non-metallic abrasive

Primer:		50 micron

Non-inhibited epoxy primer

Intermediate coat	150 micron

High build epoxy

Topcoat	150 micron

High build epoxy 



Total DFT 350 Microns

or



High build epoxy, solvent free for immersion service (8.11 EHB-SF)

Surface preparation:

Sweep (brush) blast clean or lightly roughen, using a fine non-metallic abrasive

Primer:		50 micron

Non-inhibited epoxy primer

High build epoxy

Topcoat	500 micron

High build solvent free epoxy



Total DFT 550 Microns



Galvanized vent tube external coating



New

High performance polyurethane (8.24 PUR-A)

Surface preparation 

Steel:	Abrasive blast clean to AS 1627.4, Class Sa 2½.

Galvanized steel:	Sweep (brush) blast clean or lightly roughen using a non-metallic abrasive Do not remove more than 10 µm of zinc

Primer:		75 microns DFT

Steel: zinc-rich epoxy primer

Galvanized steel: epoxy zinc phosphate primer

Intermediate coat	200 microns DFT

High build epoxy, colour N-35 light grey or as nominated

Topcoat: 	50 microns DFT

High build acrylic polyurethane, gloss or semi-gloss. Colour as nominated (including MIO).



Total DFT 325 Microns



Touch up

Acrylic latex (8.1 ACL)

Surface preparation:

Steel:	Power tool clean to AS 1627.2, class St 3 or PSt 3

Galvanized Steel: 	Power or hand sand

Primer:		40 microns DFT

Steel: 	Alkyd zinc phosphate metal primer

Galvanized Steel: 	Galvanized iron primer

Other metals: 	Waterborne acrylic primer/sealer

Intermediate coat: 	40 microns DFT

Water borne acrylic. Colour and gloss to match Topcoat: 	40 microns DFT

Water borne acrylic. Colour and gloss as nominated. 



Total DFT 120 Microns



Vent base internal repair coating

Epoxy mastic, surface tolerant (8.12 EMP)

Surface preparation:

Abrasive blast clean to AS 1627.4, Class Sa 2½.

Primer		200 microns

surface tolerant epoxy

Topcoat	200 microns

Surface tolerant epoxy



Total DFT 400 Microns



Vent base external coating



Major repair

High performance polyurethane (8.24 PUR-A)

Surface preparation 

Previously coated steel: 	Pressure wash, spot power tool clean to AS 1627.2, Class St 3 or PSt 3 

Spot Prime bare steel:		75 microns DFT

zinc-rich epoxy primer

Intermediate coat	200 microns DFT

Surface tolerant epoxy 

Topcoat: 	50 microns DFT

High build acrylic polyurethane, gloss or semi-gloss. Colour as nominated (including MIO).



Total DFT 325 Microns



Touch up

Acrylic latex (8.1 ACL)

Surface preparation 

Previously coated steel: 	Pressure wash, spot power tool clean to AS 1627.2, Class St 3 or PSt 3 

Spot Prime bare steel:		75 microns DFT

Surface tolerant epoxy 

Intermediate coat: 	40 microns DFT

Water borne acrylic. Colour and gloss to match Topcoat: 	40 microns DFT

Water borne acrylic. Colour and gloss as nominated. 



Total DFT 120 Microns



Note: 	Spot surface preparation and spot priming may be needed for paint systems with minor breakdown



Sealant Recommendations: 



Sealants serve the purpose of filling the joint to stop water and air infiltration and must be correctly designed for successful performance.



Sealant must always have a minimum of 6 mm of contact or bond surface to ensure adequate adhesion.



The sealant should be applied in a minimum 1:1 and maximum 3:1 width:depth ratio. The ideal joint has a 2:1 ratio.



Avoid three-sided adhesion. Adhesion to the back of the joint reduces the effectiveness of the sealant and can lead to early failure. Sealant should only bond to the joint substrates and not the back of the joint. Standard backing materials or bond breaker tapes should be used to prevent three-sided adhesion.



A backer rod serves several to provide resistance to the sealant during installation, allowing the sealant to fully wet out the sides of the joint when the joint is being tooled and to provide proper joint dimensions. 



A bond breaker tape prevents adhesion to the back surface of the joint. Common bond breaker materials are polyethylene, Teflon or masking tape. 



The basic steps for joint preparation and sealant application are: 

• Clean 		Joint surfaces must be clean, dry, and dust-free

• Prime 		If required, primer is applied to the clean surfaces.

• Pack 		Backer rod or bond breaker tape is installed.

• Seal 		Sealant is applied into the joint cavity.

• Tool 		Apply pressure to sealant to create a flush joint and ensure adhesion and proper joint dimensions.



Always solvent clean (and prime if required) using two-cloths (cleaning the substrate with a solvent-saturated cloth. Dry the solvent-wet surface of the substrate with a separate clean, dry cloth) immediately prior to sealant application. Use a water-soluble solvent, such as isopropyl alcohol (IPA) or Methyl Ethyl Ketone (MEK). Replace used and dirty cloths frequently.





Appendix B – Figure 1 Sealant Replacement Details



Vent Tube Replacement Work Instruction







Doc Name: CORP AM WI Vent Tube Replacement

Author: Civil Engineer, Asset Management Services

Version: 3.0

Page 9 of 9

Approver: Team Leader, Control Systems

Doc ID: 41816736

Document Uncontrolled if Printed

Approved: May 2020



CCTV Inspection – Sewerage & Drainage Pipelines


Purpose
The purpose of this Work Instruction is to outline the requirements for undertaking CCTV Inspections, reporting of Structural and Serviceability issues and storage of data, for planned inspections of underground Sewerage and Drainage Pipelines. This will ensure inspections, reporting and storage of data is carried out in a consistent manner.
 
Background
Melbourne Water manages approximately 400km of underground sewer infrastructure and approximately 1,500km of underground drainage infrastructure. These linear assets provide a vital service to the community of Melbourne, by conveying storm water to waterways thereby providing flood protection to properties and transporting sewage to the treatment plants to protect and maintain public health.

Condition monitoring through CCTV Inspections of these linear assets are undertaken in accordance with the Strategic Asset Management Plan (SAMP) to maintain agreed levels of service.

Scope
This document relates to linear assets associated with the Sewerage and Drainage infrastructure and applies to planned inspections only. The Structural and Serviceability Grading’s including reporting requirements shall be in accordance with this instruction.

Safety
All work shall be carried out in accordance with all relevant OH&S Acts, Regulations, Codes of Practice and Melbourne Water OH&S policies and procedures with particular reference to:

• CORP H&S 053 - Management of Confined Space Entry
o CORP H&S 053.8 - Confined Space Sewerage
o CORP H&S 053.10 - Confined Space Drainage
• CORP H&S PRO - Good to Go 
• CORP H&S 036 - Personal Protective Equipment
• CORP H&S 038 - Safety Equipment Procedure
• CORP H&S 050 - Manual Handling and Ergonomics
• CORP H&S 058 - Management of Sharps 
• CORP H&S 061 - Traffic Management
• Road Management Act 2004 
o Code of Practice Worksite Safety – Traffic Management (2010)
• CORP H&S 062 - Fall Prevention
• CORP H&S 064 - Permit to Work
• CORP H&S 068 - Biological Hazards
• CORP H&S 075 - Fatigue Management            

A Preliminary Hazard Identification assessment has been completed to support the service provider in preparing their Safe Work Method Statement (SWMS).

Quality
CCTV inspections shall be carried out in accordance with the current version of the WSA Conduit Inspection Reporting Code of Australia. As such, it is a requirement that all CCTV Operators be trained and accredited to this code, with a statement of attainment to be forwarded to the Area Lead (Minor Capital Governance, Contracts & Governance) for future reference.

The structural, serviceability grading and reporting requirements shall be in accordance with this instruction. 

Environment
All works shall be carried out in accordance with all relevant Environmental Acts and Regulations, including Melbourne Water requirements with particular reference to:

• No sewage spills
• Odour and Noise management
• CORP H&S 072 Waste Disposal 

Cultural Heritage
At no time should ground disturbance or excavation occur during the inspection, without the prior written approval from Melbourne Water. All works shall be carried out with appropriate control measures to protect and preserve Cultural Heritage as advised by Melbourne Water in accordance with all Cultural Heritage Acts and Regulations. Melbourne Water’s Cultural Heritage Contingency Plan is to be carried with the crew and be available on site.


Instruction
1. Planning
1.1. It is the responsibility of the service provider to understand site conditions related to access to the manhole and condition of the manhole access cover. The following information may be used as a guide to assist with planning the survey:
1.1.1. Melbourne Water’s Spatial information (GIS)

1.1.2. Cultural heritage overlays for area of sensitivity buffer (GIS)

1.1.3. Melbourne Water’s EPMS for design and as-constructed drawings of the assets

1.2. Where safe and practical to do so, a site pre-inspection should be considered, particularly where site conditions are unknown. A sound understanding of current site conditions is advantageous to enabling the safe and efficient delivery of works 

1.3. The contractor shall schedule the survey that will produce the best results with minimal disruption or interference and shall consider as a minimum, the following in determining timing of survey:
1.3.1. Daily flow variations
1.3.2. Tidal conditions
1.3.3. Traffic conditions
1.3.4. Residential, commercial and industrial areas
1.3.5. Access to private property
1.3.6. Public nuisance, noise and odour

1.4. A permit application is to be made to the Integrated Control Centre (ICC) or Regional Teams providing a minimum 5 business days’ notice

1.5. Notify local residents via letter drop:
1.5.1. Five (5) days prior to any work that requires access to private property or that will restrict resident access

1.5.2. Three (3) days prior to any work that must be undertaken at night

1.5.3. The service provider shall make all reasonable attempts to re-schedule the inspection upon receipt of any requests or complaints received as a result of the communication

1.6.  Completing any additional required notifications as advised by Melbourne Water

1.7. Where manholes are located within trafficable areas, preparing Traffic Management Plans and obtaining approvals from the relevant authority (E.g. VicRoads) prior to the commencement of works

1.8. Emergency works are exempt from advance notifications as per 1.5

2. Inspection
2.1. All activities carried out are to be undertaken as to not interfere unnecessarily or improperly with access to, or use of, private property

2.2. The contractor’s equipment and work methods shall be designed to prevent excessive backing up of flows. Under no circumstances shall the contractor employ equipment or methods which may cause the pipeline or manhole to back up to the extent that an overflow or spill is possible

2.3. Implementation and management of all necessary traffic and/or pedestrian/cyclists controls where applicable

2.4. For Sewer CCTV, verification that the sewer manhole marker has not been removed or damaged

2.5. Undertake a manhole inspection survey as per the current WSA Conduit Reporting Code of Australia, with particular emphasis on the following:
2.5.1. Manholes are defined as shafts constructed along the pipeline with ladders or step irons provided to enable person access to the invert of the pipeline. They are generally located at up to 200m spacing intervals, and consist of a circular gatic cover for sewer pipelines and a square gatic for drainage pipelines

2.5.2. Inspection shafts are defined as shafts located along the centreline of the pipeline. These shafts may contain similar size access covers to manholes, but are not designed for person access with no ladders or step irons provided. These shafts are not required to be surveyed

2.5.3. The camera shall be positioned approximately 5m upstream of the manhole cover and panned through 360 degrees, halting facing in the direction of the downstream manhole. If the downstream manhole is not visible, the position shall be clearly marked with a distinctive marker such as a ranging pole or similar. The panning shall include significant landmarks to assist in locating the manhole in future such as street names, roads and buildings

2.5.4. The manhole cover shall then be panned in sufficient detail to record the condition of the manhole, and where no marker is present, be marked on the cover with the manhole asset ID (E.g. 4702/MH006 or MRM050)

2.5.5. The manhole cover shall be removed and the manhole shaft recorded from surface level to show internal fittings such as ladders, step irons, drop pipes, landings and telemetry devices

2.5.6. Where vent lines are present within the manhole, an inspection of the vent line is to be carried out during the manhole inspection

2.5.7. Where vent stacks are present, the service provider shall inspect the external condition of the vent stack as per 2.5.3, and paying attention to the connection between the tube and the base

2.5.8. Vent stacks are defined as above ground structures located away from the sewer to allow the sewer to ventilate. The vent stacks are generally painted in green and can extend up to 15m in height. They are connected to the sewer by an underground pipeline (i.e. vent line) through the manhole

2.6. Depth of flow is to be measured from the manhole inspection
2.6.1. Pipeline inspection can commence when depth of flow does not exceed 1/3 or 30% of pipe height

2.6.2. Where flows exceed 1/3 or 30% of pipe height, inspection is to be re-scheduled to co-ordinate flow isolations with Melbourne Water, unless otherwise agreed to with Melbourne Water

2.6.3. Where 2.6.2 occurs, the contractor shall supply all necessary materials to isolate the flows and shall co-ordinate the flow isolation with Melbourne Water

2.7. Undertake pipeline inspection survey as per the current WSA Conduit Reporting Code of Australia, with particular emphasis on the following:
2.7.1. Before positioning the camera within the pipeline and where possible and safe to do so, a video record shall be made of the end of the pipeline, as seen from the manhole for significant features such as number of rings or layers of bricks

2.7.2. The starting point of the survey shall be at the centreline of the manhole and shall be recorded as Chainage 0.00m

2.7.3. The camera head position is to be placed centrally along the vertical axis of the pipe, prior to the commencement of the survey

2.7.4. For ovoid or egg shape pipelines, the camera head is to be placed at 2/3 above the invert of the pipe height

2.7.5. Unless otherwise agreed in writing by Melbourne Water, the speed of the survey shall not exceed 0.20m/sec

2.7.6. All observed defects are to be examined in detail whilst in the idle position utilising the pan, tilt and zoom function

2.7.7. If the camera is panned, tilted or zoomed whilst moving forward at the same time, then it is to be withdrawn to where panning, tilting or zoom started and repositioned centrally along the vertical axis of the pipeline before proceeding with the survey

2.7.8. In the event footage is lost during survey (e.g. low battery or interference), the survey shall re-commence 1.00 metre prior to where the footage was lost

2.7.9. In the event the chainage meter reading is lost or malfunctioning, the survey shall re-commence 1.00 metre prior to where the error occurred

2.8. Abandonment of survey may be considered in the following circumstances
2.8.1. There is a risk to the health and safety of the contractor, despite adequate controls in place

2.8.2. An obstruction making further progress impractical or posing a risk of damage to the equipment

2.8.3. High flow conditions, despite adequate flow isolation controls 

2.8.4. Poor visibility due to environmental conditions, despite adequate controls in place (E.g. forced ventilation and extraction)

2.8.5. Return surveys are obstructed leading to incomplete footage (E.g. Cannot bypass via U/S or D/S manhole)

2.9. In the event of an abandonment, the contractor shall proceed to the next conduit length to be surveyed and continue, unless otherwise directed by Melbourne Water

2.10. Cleaning and greasing of the manhole access cover on replacement

3. Reporting
3.1. All reporting of data is to be compliant to the current WSA Conduit Reporting Code of Australia, with a particular emphasis on the following:
3.1.1. The start of each inspection to contain the following minimum information

3.1.1.1. Date of survey
3.1.1.2. Road name
3.1.1.3. Direction of survey
3.1.1.4. Time of survey
3.1.1.5. Material
3.1.1.6. Shape
3.1.1.7. Size
3.1.1.8. Upstream and downstream Melbourne Water manhole numbers (E.g. 4702/MH006 or MRM050)

3.1.2. Data supplied by the contractor shall be in WinCan V8 format or newer, and uploaded to Melbourne Water’s pipe works network drive (E.g. Z:Drive) no later than 10 working days after inspection completion

3.1.3. Storage of footage data on the pipe works network drive to be arranged in Sewer and Drainage folders as per the following structure:

3.2. The contractor acknowledges that Melbourne Water have full physical and intellectual rights to all the surveyed data and must not share the surveyed data without the prior written approval from Melbourne Water

3.3. Unless otherwise agreed with Melbourne Water in writing, the reporting of observations to Melbourne Water are to be carried out in the form of phone call notifications and service requests in Maximo as per 3.7, 3.8 and 3.9

3.4. Each conduit length shall be entered as separate line inspections and contain Melbourne Water manhole asset numbers

3.5. All footage submitted shall be clear and adequately illuminated to focus on the asset

3.6. Public safety hazards (E.g. slips, trips and falls) within the vicinity of Melbourne Water assets are to be identified and reported

3.7. Structural Grading
3.7.1. The contractor shall report the structural grade to Melbourne Water as per the following table: 












Table 1: Structural Reporting Requirements
Structural Grade
Action
Service Request Level (Maximo)
5
Where safe to do so, make area safe. Phone call notification to Asset Management and ICC (Sewer) or the relevant Customer Response Officer (CRO) within Regional Services (see GIS layer) immediately for further advice. Service request to be assigned to ICC or Regional Teams
1 – Urgent
4
Phone call to Asset Management within 24 hours of inspection followed by a Service Request to Asset Management
2 – High
3
Service request to be assigned to Asset Management at completion of inspection
3 – Medium
2
No action required
None required
1
No action required
None required

3.7.2. The contractor shall grade the pipeline based on the highest severity as per 3.7.5 and 3.7.6 for each inspection length

3.7.3. All other materials to be compliant to the current WSA Conduit Reporting Code of Australia, unless otherwise agreed in writing with Melbourne Water

3.7.4. Where uncertainty arises, seek further advice from Melbourne Water

3.7.5. Brickwork or Bluestone Pipeline

Grade 1

Grade 1
Grade 1 Criteria – Original shape and mortar intact. Gun barrel straight

Grade 2 – Isolated missing mortar

Grade 2 – Isolated missing mortar
Grade 2 Criteria – Isolated missing mortar or isolated cracking

Grade 3 – Widespread missing mortar

Grade 3 – Brick separation

Grade 3 – Widespread missing mortar

Grade 3 – Widespread missing mortar
Grade 3 Criteria – Widespread missing mortar or isolated displacement / separation

Grade 4 – Displaced & crushed bricks

Grade 4 – Missing bricks
Grade 4 Criteria – Multiple displaced bricks or crushed bricks or deformation or missing bricks or no mortar visible

Grade 5 – Void visible

Grade 5 – Missing bricks with soil visible
Grade 5 Criteria – Dropped invert, void visible or collapse

3.7.6. Reinforced Concrete or Concrete Pipelines

Grade 1

Grade 1
Grade 1 Criteria – Original shape and material intact. Gun barrel straight

Grade 2 – Longitudinal crack

Grade 2 – Aggregates visible
Grade 2 Criteria – Cracking or aggregates or corrosion products visible

Grade 3 – Reinforcement visible in small patches

Grade 3 – Defective rubber ring joint

Grade 3 – Displaced joint

Grade 3 – Displaced joint
Grade 3 Criteria – Defective or displaced joint or reinforcement visible in small patches

Grade 4 – Deformation

Grade 4 – Reinforcement exposed & corroded
Grade 4 Criteria – Widespread reinforcement missing, exposed, corroded or break or deformation

Grade 5 – Collapsed pipe

Grade 5 – Break with void visible
Grade 5 Criteria – Collapse or void visible


3.8. Serviceability Grading
3.8.1. The contractor shall report the Serviceability Grade as per the following table:

Table 2: Serviceability Reporting Requirements
Service Request Level (Maximo)
Action
Melbourne Water General Response Time
1 – Urgent
For public safety hazards, make area safe. Phone call to ICC (Sewer) or the relevant CRO within Regional Services (see GIS layer) immediately, followed by service request assigned to ICC or Regional Services
Within 24 hours
2 – High
Phone call to ICC or Regional Services within 24 hours of inspection, followed by service request assigned to ICC or Regional Services. For manhole cover, ladder or step iron replacement, direct to Asset Management for attention
Within 48 hours
3 – Medium
Service request to ICC or Regional Services at completion of group inspection
Within 4 to 6 weeks
4 – Low
Service request to Asset Management at completion of group inspection
Within 12 weeks

3.8.2. The contractor shall grade the Serviceability impact as follows:


Level 1 - >50% obstruction

Level 1 - >50% obstruction

Level 1 – Damaged cover presenting public safety risk

Level 1 – Missing handrails top of outlet presenting fall from height risk
Level 1 Criteria - >50% obstruction and public safety risk

Level 2 – 20% to 50% obstruction

Level 2 – Mass roots obstruction 50%

Level 2 – Service obstruction 30%

Level 2 – Mass roots obstruction 40%

Level 2 – Corroded ladder required for access

Level 2 – Access cover replacement for access
Level 2 Criteria – 20% to 50% obstruction and restricted access requiring cover or internal fitting replacements to complete inspection (E.g. No bypass with U/S and D/S manhole restricted)

Level 3 – 20% obstruction

Level 3 – 20% rubble obstruction

Level 3 – Blocked drop pipe overflowing

Level 3 – Missing drop pipe
Level 3 Criteria – 20% obstruction and blocked or missing drop pipes

Level 4 – Widespread infiltration running along pipeline

Level 4 – Elevated manhole not required for access
Level 4 Criteria – Widespread infiltration running along pipeline and elevated manholes or buried manholes not required for access to complete inspection (E.g. Can bypass from U/S or D/S manhole)

3.9.  Service Request
3.9.1. Information required for the service request is to be in accordance with Melbourne Water’s Service Request User Guide, with particular emphasis on the following:

3.9.1.1. A priority level is to be assigned as per 3.6.1 and 3.7.1

3.9.1.2. A problem code is to be assigned

3.9.1.3. A contact group is to be assigned

3.9.1.4. The Melbourne Water asset number to be assigned

3.9.1.5. Details of the issue

3.9.1.6. An attachment of a photo illustrating the issue

3.10. Asset Data Variations
3.10.1. Where supplied data from Melbourne Water (GIS or EPMS) varies from site conditions, the contractor shall annotate on site plans or drawings and submit to Melbourne Water at the completion of the inspection. Examples include:
3.10.1.1. Pipe size or shape

3.10.1.2. Pipe material

3.10.1.3. Manhole location or pipe lengths

3.11. Loss of equipment or materials during survey
3.11.1. If during the course of the survey, any of the contractors equipment or material becomes lost, the contractor shall report the matter immediately to the following Melbourne Water representative in order of priority via phone call and email:

3.11.1.1. ICC or Regional Services

3.11.1.2. Asset Management

3.11.2. The contractor shall note that loss of equipment or materials may cause extensive damage to downstream pumping equipment but prompt notification may enable Melbourne Water to instigate protective measures to prevent such damage. Even minor items such as a length of rope can cause damage so it is important that all losses are reported

3.12.  Financials
3.12.1. The contractor is required to provide monthly forecast and accrual details as nominated by Melbourne Water

3.12.2. Where possible, work orders for completed inspections are to be financially closed within 30 days of inspection to assist with financial reporting 
Definitions 
Reference
Definition
CCTV
Closed Circuit Television
CRO
Customer Response Officer
EPMS
Electronic Plan Management System
GIS
Geographic Information System
ICC
Integrated Control Centre
SAMP
Strategic Asset Management Plan
SWMS
Safe Work Method Statement
WSAA
Water Services Association of Australia

References 
Standards and Related Documents
Code of Practice Worksite Safety – Traffic Management (2010) 
CORP H&S PRO - Good to Go 
CORP H&S 003 - Preliminary Hazard Identification
CORP H&S 036 - Personal Protective Equipment
CORP H&S 038 - Safety Equipment Procedure
CORP H&S 050 - Manual Handling and Ergonomics
CORP H&S 053 - Management of Confined Space Entry
CORP H&S 053.10 - Confined Space Drainage
CORP H&S 053.8 - Confined Space Sewerage
CORP H&S 058 - Management of Sharps
CORP H&S 061 - Traffic Management
CORP H&S 062 - Fall Prevention
CORP H&S 064 - Permit to Work
CORP H&S 068 - Biological Hazards
CORP H&S 072 Waste Disposal 
CORP H&S 075 - Fatigue Management
Cultural Heritage Contingency Plan
Melbourne Water Cultural Heritage Contingency Plan
Melbourne Water Service Request User Guide - Desktop
Melbourne Water Service Request User Guide - iPad
Road Management Act 2004
WSA Conduit Reporting Code of Australia

Stakeholder Consultation 
Alan Mizzi, Civil Superintendent, Wood 
William Murphy, Area Lead – Minor Capital Governance, Contracts & Governance
Anne Derriman, Area Lead - Drainage, Flood Services
Raglan Hawkins, Asset Practitioner, Flood Services
Kirsty Mountford, Principal Investment Planning & Continuous Improvement, Civil Sewerage Asset Management 

Document History
Date
Reviewed/ Actioned By
Version
Action
15/11/16
Victor Mu
1.0
Replacement document for retired SMI
Reviewed and complete re-write in to new work instruction and conversion to updated template
05/12/2016
Elisa Bourke
2.0
Added document to IMS document library.  Assigned new document ID and applied new version number in line with Inflo version control.
08/03/2019
Victor Mu
3.0
Minor revisions and updates to hyperlinks and references

This work instruction is to be reviewed every 2 years.



CCTV Inspection – Sewerage & Drainage Pipelines





Doc Name: CORP AM WI CTV Inspection – Sewerage & Drainage Pipelines
Author: Area Lead – Civil Sewer Transfer
Version: 5.0
Page 1 of 20
Approver: Team Leader Sewer Civil Asset Management
Doc ID:  43603423
Document Uncontrolled if Printed
Approved: March 2019



Creating a Job Plan Work Instruction

Purpose
The purpose of the document is to enable users to develop Job Plans in Maximo. It provides guidance as to what is minimum required to be populated. 

Two direct outputs of Job Plans include:
• Task instruction to perform the job, which includes all required resources and control of work.
• Estimated cost to perform the activity.

Development of Job Plans are a crucial component to job planning directly affecting scheduling and delivery of work.

Scope
This document will detail how to develop the minimum required information for Job Plans in Maximo. 

Job Plans provide a detailed description of work task steps, labor, materials, services and tools to be performed for a job. The Job Plans application is used to create, revise, duplicate and make active/inactive job plans. Job Plans are applied to preventative maintenance records and routes. 

The Work Initiator defines the initial Job Plan for a PM identifying what is required to be done and it is then associated to the relevant PM for specific Assets and Locations. The Job Plan is then updated by the Service Provider (SP) performing the job. 
The main areas updated by the SP Planner:
• Duration
• Craft/Crew
• Labor Hours
• Materials
• Services
• Tools
• Work Instruction

There are other items to consider in addition to what has been listed, but where there are significant differences, separate Job Plans should be developed. For example, a pump overhaul on one asset may have different requirements to another pump overhaul on another asset.



References 
Standards and Related Documents
CORP AM BPM Planning.vsd
CORP AM FRM Work Order and Job Plan Planning Checklist.docx
CORP AM WI Planning a Work Order.docx
CORP AM WI Creating a Job Plan.docx
CORP AM PRO Planned Maintenance Initiation.docx
CORP H&S PRO – Management of Change.docx
CORP H&S PRO - Control of Work
Create Job Plan Quick Reference Guide




Job Plans Overview

Section
Go to
Accessing Job Plans in Maximo
Section 1
Job Plan Application Front Page
Section 2
Job Plan tab
Section 3
Details tab
Section 4
Where Used Tab – for Information
Section 5
Job Plan Activation
Section 6
Trouble Shooting Common Errors
Section 7

Section 1 Accessing Job Plans
Prerequisites
• You must have access to Maximo Job Plans (HSE) application and an active log-in in order to access the Service Request functionality which will enable you to raise and manage a service request.

Item 
Description
1
There are 2 methods to accessing the Job Plans (HSE) Application after logging into Maximo.
Method 1 – Via the Favorite Applications (if set up) in the Start Center. To return to the Start Center at any time, click  in the top toolbar. 

Method 2 – Go To Applications > Planning > Job Plans (HSE). ‘Go To Applications’ can be accessed from the pancake stack in the top toolbar  at any time. 

          
Section 2 Job Plan Application Front Page

The Job Plans (HSE) application front page is shown and numbered items are described briefly below.
On the left side menu you will see a list of ‘Common Actions’. From here you can create a ‘New Job Plan’ or ‘Change Status’ of an existing Job Plan.


The following is a search screen that provides filters to produce a specific or defined list of job plans based on the entered criteria.


Item 
Description
2.1
Job Plan - Job Plan number. It is very important when searching for a specific Job Plan that it is done from this field. It is important that you search using this field instead of ‘Find Job Plan’ field as here it will display all the JP versions.
2.2
Revision – revision number of the Job Plan. This is automatically populated.
2.3
Template Type - this identifies the type of Job Plan. Choose from the options that best describe the type of Job Plan
2.4
Description - text description of the Job Plan as per the following naming convention:

2.5
Status - status of the Job Plan. The main statuses to take note of are as follows:
• DRAFT = The initial status when creating a Job Plan (Initiator)
• ACTIVE = Active and is the current version in use. (Initiator, SP)
• INACTIVE = Inactive but can be made active again. (Initiator)
• PNDREV = Pending revision; the Job Plan is in the process of being revised. (Initiator, SP)
2.6
Activity - classification of activity which is defined in the JP and carries down to the PM. Select the predominant Activity from the list. (Initiator)
2.7
Service Provider – service provider responsible for delivering the work this field with be changed to Service Provider. Select the relevant SP delivering the work. (Initiator)
2.8
Responsible Party - the MW team responsible for the Job Plan. 



Section 3.1 Job Plan Tab

The following details what fields have to be populated for a Job Plan. Unless already pre-populated, the mandatory fields for population and consideration are boxed in red. This is a brief introduction to the fields and more details on how to will be covered in a later section.

Note: 
The steps with (Initiator) is the group responsible for creating the initial JP. 
E.g. AMS, Regional Services, etc.
The steps with (SP) is the Service Provider responsible for populating the resources for the JP. E.g. WLID, WG, etc.

Job Plan Detail



Item 
Description
3.1.1
Job Plan - the Job Plan tab is where a Job Plan record is created, revised etc. 
3.1.2
Work Assets – Nominate asset that require datasheets. Only relevant with calibrations and datasheets. (Initiator)
3.1.3
Control of Work – Permits requirements are entered under this tab. (SP)
3.1.4
Regulations – Relevant regulation requirement are populate in this tab. (Initiator)
3.1.5
Where used - the ‘Where Used’ tab shows what PM/s the Job Plan record is associated with as well as WO history. (Automatic)
3.1.6
Job Plan Number and Description - if required more detail can be added to the Long Description. The name convention is “Asset type” + “Description of Work”, e.g. Water Tank Internal Inspection, as opposed to Tank Check. (Initiator)
3.1.7
Revision - this will show the Revision number which is automatically populated. (Automatic)
3.1.8
Service Provider – select from the list the associated Service Provider responsible for providing the work. (SP)
3.1.9
Status -  the main statuses to take note of are as follows:
• ACTIVE = Active and in use.
• INACTIVE = Inactive but can be made active again.
• PNDREV = Pending revision; the Job Plan is in the process of being revised.
3.1.10
Duration - the length of a job to be completed from start to finish in hours. This is not to be confused with Labor Hours. (SP)
3.1.11
Template Type - this identifies the type of Job Plan. Choose from the options that best describe the type of Job Plan. (Initiator)
3.1.12
Responsible Party – the party responsible for the Job Plan. (Initiator)
3.1.13
Activity – this is a short description of the activity type. Select from the list of options. (Initiator)
3.1.14
Discipline – pick the discipline from the list that will be controlling the job. Whilst there may be different disciplines of Craft associated with a job, business rules dictate that the Discipline in control of the job is selected. (Initiator, SP)
3.1.15
Attachments – Associated documents can be added to the Job Plan here. The attachments will carry down to any generated WOs. (Initiator, SP)
Note: the process of applying attachments is described later in this document.
3.1.16
Requires Asset Downtime? – check this box if asset is required to be offline. If not, leave it unchecked. When ticked the ‘Asset Downtime (Hrs)’ field is to be populated with the expected hours of downtime. (SP)
3.1.17
Reason for Work – this is where the reason for the work is identified. This value, together with Asset Criticality, forms part of the calculation for ‘Work Priority’ on the Work Order. (Initiator)
3.1.18
Condition of Work – this where the type of isolation required is nominated. Select from the options provided. (SP)
3.1.19
HACCP/MHF – this is a field that is managed by the Contractor Governance Team as this is a flag to manage contractor KPI. (Initiator)
3.1.20
Interruptible – this is to nominate if the job can be interrupted by something more important. Check this box if the job is Interruptible. If not, leave it unchecked. (SP)
3.1.21
Asset Downtime (Hrs) – If the asset is required to be offline as identified in Item 18 then enter the hours that it is expected to be offline. (SP)
Note: this does not have to match the duration.



Section 3.2 Job Plan Tab - Tasks

This section is for developing the Job Plan Tasks.
The minimum requirement here is to provide a list of the task required to be performed.

The Permit and Certificate Type and the Risk Assessment fields are not populated here.

Item 
Description
3.2.1
New Row – this generates a new task.
3.2.2
Task number and Task Description - the Task is allocated a number and the Description is where the Task is described. If more information needs to be entered it can be entered in the Long Description by clicking the circled icon.
The current rules for JP task are:

Job Plan tasks should conform to the following guidelines.

• Tasks must be limited to 100 characters.
• Tasks must be numbered in increments of 10, in the required sequence of execution.
• Tasks should explicitly describe the required action to achieve the work outcome. 
• Tasks should be clear, direct and worded as a directive needing completion. 
• Tasks should eliminate the need for interpretation by the person performing the work.
• Tasks should be written in a clear and detailed manner, leaving no room for confusion or doubt.
• Standard practice tasks should not be included on a Job Plan e.g. Raise an SR for defects

Tips for writing Job plan tasks
• Use plain everyday English, preference simple language wherever possible 
• Write clear sentences, preferably less than 20 words
• Use an active voice when writing tasks
• Use words with a defined and understood meaning
• Avoid using slang or jargon
• Avoid complex technical language, wherever possible 
• Avoid using “If applicable” statements 
• Remove unnecessary words for tasks, less words are often clearer 

(Initiator, SP)


Section 1.4 Job Plan Tasks – Mandatory Population Fields
Section 3.3 Job Plan Tab - Labor

This identifies the list of Labor for the Job Plan. All required internal Labor Crew Type and/or Craft Resources are entered here. Note that this is not for subcontract labor.

Use the Planned Labor to enter the Craft or Crew Type required on the job. For example, if a combination of electricians and mechanical technicians are required, 2 records will need to be entered as shown below. 


Item 
Description
3.3.1
Crew Type – Crews are usually made up of more than one person that work together to perform specific types of work (e.g. WL-NRM WLD NRM Crew of 2). 
Select from the list the relevant Crew Type. (SP)
3.3.2
Craft - here is where the type of Labor resource is selected. At the time this was written, there are approximately 600 types of Craft. When selecting Craft, select the ‘generic’ type as opposed to the Crafts with the level breakdowns. This is not flagged but some of the ‘generic’ Crafts are as follows:
• Craft
• Skill Level
• Description
• Vendor
• Contract
• Organization
• CIV_LAB
• -
• CIVIL LABOURER
• -
• -
• MWO
• ELEC_TEC
• -
• ELECTRICAL TECHNICIAN
• -
• -
• MWO
• INST_TEC
• -
• INSTRUMENTATION TECHNICIAN
• -
• -
• MWO
• MECH_TEC
• -
• MECHANICAL TECHNICIAN
• -
• -
• MWO
• PLC_PROG
• -
• PLC PROGRAMMER
• -
• -
• MWO
• INVN_OFF
• -
• INVENTORY OFFICIER
• -
• -
• MWO
(SP)
3.3.3
Required Qualifications – if required this is where the Qualification of a Craft is entered; i.e. any defined skillset required by the Craft in the Job Plan. In cases where there is more than 1 Qualification or skillset required, the more dominant or the limiting Qualification is chosen. Separate rows can be added for identical Craft if required. (SP)
3.3.4
Quantity – the required number of each type of Craft. 
E.g. if three mechanical technicians are required for the job, then 3 would be entered in this field. (SP)
3.3.5
Hours – here is where you enter effort hours required for each craft or crew. (SP)
E.g. if each of the above Mechanical Technicians where require for the whole day then you would enter 8 in this field. The system will multiply these hours by the Quantity and the rate.
3.3.6
Rate – this field is automatically populated based on the Craft/Crew chosen. (SP)
3.3.7
Line Cost – this is system populated based on Quantity x Hours x Rate. Ensure this has a value relevant to the associated labor. (SP)
3.3.8
New Row - this generates a new labor entry.


Section 3.4 Job Plan Tab - Materials

This identifies the list of materials for the job plan. This includes store inventory items, consignment, purchases and Vendor Managed Inventory (VMI). 
Note: all items including Direct Issue must be selected from the Item Master.


Item 
Description
3.4.1
Item - The Item is an item or material required to perform the work and is selected via the chevron (>):  Select Value. (SP)
Each different item will need to be identified on a separate row.
Note: see Line Type to allow the entry of a material that is not in Item Master.
3.4.2
Item Quantity – enter the number of the chosen item units. (SP)
3.4.3
Vendor - this field identifies the Vendor the Material is to be purchased from. Select the relevant Vendor from the list. (SP)
3.4.4
Direct Issue? - When ticked, it signifies that a purchase requisition requires generation for the nominated Vendor rather than obtaining the item from inventory at a Storeroom. Ticking this box signifies that the material will be direct purchased. (SP)
3.4.5
Unit Cost – this will be populated by the system if the item has been chosen from inventory. You must manually populate this field if it is identified as Direct Issue?
3.4.6
Line Cost - this will be populated by the system if the item has been chosen from inventory. You must manually populate this field if it is identified as Direct Issue? Ensure this has a value relevant to the associated materials.
3.4.7
New Row - this generates a new material entry.
Note: In the event the required Material item is not listed, a request can be made for its addition to the Item Master as an Item via the store person using the CORP AM FOR Inventory AMIS Catalogue Item Single Request.docx Form. However for an Item to be added to the storeroom as inventory so it can be purchased as inventory (stock), a request needs to be put through to the Melbourne Water Governance team. 
Section 3.5 Job Plan Tab - Services

This section is for any purchases for engagement of subcontractor services and includes hire of equipment. Examples include: hire of educator truck, elevated work platform (state specific type if known, e.g. scissor lift), hire of specific calibrator, crane or franna hire etc.


Item 
Description
3.5.1
Service Item - The Service Item is selected via the chevron (>):  Select Value. (SP)
Select the Service that best describes the service being provided. Is this like a Material with costs associated or just a description?
3.5.2
Quantity – enter the number of the chosen item units. (SP)
Note: if you have chosen the units of ‘Box’ and there are 100 in a box make sure you enter the number of boxes required not the sum of the quantities inside the box/s
3.5.3
Unit Cost – this will be populated by the system if the item has been chosen from inventory. You must manually populate this field if it is identified as Direct Issue?
3.5.4
Line Cost - ensure that a line cost automatically populates from entering the Quantity. If not it must be entered against the Vendor. This will be populated by the system if the item has been chosen from inventory. You must manually populate this field if it is identified as Direct Issue? Ensure this has a value relevant to the associated Services.
3.5.5
Vendor - the Vendor that will provide the Service. Where possible always select the Vendor relevant to the Service Provider (e.g. prefixed with WG for Wood). (SP)
In the event the required Vendor is not listed, see note.
3.5.6
New Row - this generates a new service entry.
Note: In the event the required Vendor is not listed, a request can be made for its addition to Maximo via IT Support. 

Email the following table with details populated to It.Support@melbournewater.com.au:

COMPMASTER.COMPANY_R
COMPMASTER.NAME_R
COMPANIES.ADDRESS1_R
COMPANIES.ADDRESS3_R
COMPANIES.ADDRESS4_R
COMPANIES.ADDRESS5_R
ABN
XXXXXX

Name
Street Number and Name
Suburb
State
Postcode
ABN

Note: For the first column field COMPMASTER.COMPANY_R, If being requested by a Service Provider then enter the Vendor’s Number Preceded by the relevant SP code. E.g. WG for Wood.


Section 3.6 Job Plan Tab - Tools

This maintains a Tool list for the Job Plan. This is for internal tools and equipment only. Examples of tools include tools booked out of the store such as a dry block calibrator, Multirae gas detector, thermography gun etc. 

Tools fall into 3 categories:
• Personal Tools – tools that are owned by the nominated craft labor (e.g. Electrician) and are expected to be provided by them. E.g. personal spanners and screwdrivers.
• Permanent Issue – tools that are provided to the labor permanently either to the person or to the vehicle. E.g. multimeter.
• Temporary Issue – are usually special tools not provided by the labor or 

Only Temporary Issue tools are to be identified here. 
Do not record here are any tools and equipment which need to be hired in. This should be recorded in Services.


Item 
Description
3.6.1
Tool - select Tool required from list. (SP)
Note: Do not select any Tool starting with “EQ” or “Equipment”. At the time this was written, it is advised the Tools starting with “EQ” were too generic and were going to be removed in the near future. For example, do not select TOOLME Equipment – Meter.
Note: For internal use of a tool like Eductor Truck which is booked out of the Eastern Treatment Plant, 2 Civil resources must be added to Labor. They do not automatically populate.
3.6.2
Tool Quantity – enter how many tools of this type are required. Default is ‘1’. (SP)
3.6.3
Tool Hours – enter the hours the tool will be required. The job duration can be used for this field. (SP)
Note: This is only required if the tool is owned by anyone else other than MW. E.g. Service Provider.
3.6.4
Tool Rate – this is the per hour the tools is to be charged to the Work Order. (SP)
Note: This is only required if the tool is owned by anyone else other than MW. E.g. Service Provider. 
3.6.5
Line Cost – this is an automated field and is a calculation of Tool Quantity x Tool Hours x Rate. If this is a MW tool then the Line cost will be zero.
3.6.6
New Row - this generates a new tool entry.

Note: In the event the required Tool is not listed, a request can be made for its addition to Maximo. 

A description of the tool and its classification (1 of 3 defined below) to be included in the request. 

Rotating Tool 
A serialized tool used in works and is periodically returned to storeroom. It requires maintenance, e.g. chainsaw or a gas detector.
Generic Tool
A tool, not being an asset, that is recorded in the Tools catalogue.
A tool which is used in works and is periodically “returned” to Storeroom, e.g. fence post strainer. The tool must meet one of the following criteria:
Its location outside the storeroom needs to be known, but not which specific tool it is;
The tool’s use is planned, e.g. used in Job Plan.
Consumable
Has the characteristics of a Generic Tool but can generally not have a requirement to be returned to the Storeroom and have a very short life span e.g. Plastic bucket.  



Section 3.7 Job Plan Tab - Attachments

Attachments are documents that can be added to the Job Plan and are then made available to the user to assist in the Job Plans execution.

You access Attachments from the following Attachment icons in the Maximo JP.

To add a new file you must have the link of the document you wish to associate. This can be copied from Inflo as follows.




Item 
Description
3.7.1
Properties - Find the document in Inflo and click ‘Properties’ symbol located on the line. This will copy the link to the clipboard. 
3.7.2
Copy the Open short link – select the drop down arrow and select this option.
3.7.3
OK – select OK and this will copy the link to your clipboard.



To associate this document via the link you have copied to the Job Plan, continue as follows.



Item 
Description
3.7.4
Click Attachments.




Item 
Description
3.7.5
Hover over “Add New Attachments”.
3.7.6
Click “Add New Web Page”.




Item 
Description
3.7.7
Select “Attachments” from the drop down. 
3.7.8
Paste the Inflo Link which was copied from Step 3.7.3 or from the register.
3.7.9
Keep the naming convention of the document the same as in the register/on Inflo.
3.7.10
Ensure this is ticked so the document is printed if the WO is printed. If the attachment is a manual, you may not want to tick this.
3.7.11
Click OK to complete.

Photographs, documents and other attachments can be added to the Job Plan. 
It is preferred to link attachments from Inflo. For example if a form is used across 15 job plans, and a recent change made that form out of date, it would need to be updated 15 times on each Job Plan. However if it was linked through Inflo, it would only need to be updated once.



Section 4 Details Tab 

The field/s that need to be populated in this tab relate to control of work. It includes primary and secondary permits as well as if an activity is permit exempt. This field also appears at the task level under Job Plan Tasks, but control of work is not populated at the task level.
Refer to ‘CORP H&S PRO - Control of Work’ document for more information. 


Item 
Description
4.1
Control of Work - Select this tab to enter any permit or certificate requirements
4.2
Permit and Certificate Type - Select the relevant type using the chevron (>). (Initiator, SP)

Note, only one type can be entered per row. To enter another row, click New Row.
E.g. If the Job Plan Activity requires a High Risk Permit, Hot Work Permit and a Confined Space Entry Permit, there would be 3 rows.



Section 5 Regulations Tab

The Regulations tab is to be reviewed to see if there are any associated regulations that could be relevant to the planning of the work order.


Item 
Description
5.1
Regulation – If populated ensure the planning of the work order takes any regulations into account.



Section 5 Where Used Tab

The Where Used tab in Job Plans shows where the Job Plan record is associated as well as WO history. No fields need to be populated in this tab. However it is important as the information on this tab will help determine if additional JPs need to be written.
Note: If this is a new JP then there will be no data here until the associations are made.





Item 
Description
6.1
Status - this is the Status of the PM. ACTIVE PMs generate WOs at the Frequency.
Note: It is generally ACTIVE or INACTIVE. Whilst it is the ACTIVE PMs which are to be specifically focused on, bear in mind that INACTIVE PMs can be made ACTIVE again for reasons determined by Asset Management. Hence it is good practice to also check INACTIVE lines for consideration for AEs. If in doubt consult the Asset Manager which the PM originated from (viewable in the Preventative Maintenance Application) or focus on ACTIVE lines.
6.2
PM and Description - the PM number and its corresponding description. 
Note: To find out more information about the PM, go into the Preventative Maintenance Application.
6.3
Asset and Location - the Assets and Locations that are associated with the PM that is connected to this JP. 
Note: To find out more information about the Asset or Location, go into the Assets application.
6.4
Work Orders - Historical WOs are listed in this section. To view the WO, click the double chevron which will take you to the Work Order Application.


Section 6 Job Plan Activation
A Job Plan must have its Status changed to ‘ACTIVE’ prior to it being used in a PM and WO. This is done after all changes have been made and information populated whilst the Job Plan is in PNDREV.



Item 
Description
7.1
Change Status - to change status of the Job Plan, click the Change Status symbol.
7.2
New Status - select ‘Active’.
7.3
Memo - enter short description of the change. This step is not compulsory.
7.4
OK - click OK to confirm status change.

If the JP is activated and another change needs to be made, it can be revised for any changes and activated again.


Document Controls 
Role
Name
Author
Angus Mackintosh
Reviewer
Taran Medcalf
Approver/ Owner
Warren Payne


Document History
[Only add details of previous two versions]
Date
Reviewed/ Actioned By
Version
Action
2017
Beverley Chin
0
Document Created
15.04.2019
Angus Mackintosh
1
Document Updated

Job Plan Creation Work Instruction



Doc Name: CORP AM WI Job Plan Creation
Author: Angus Mackintosh 
Version: 1.0
Page 22 of 25
Approver: Kristina Sestokas
Doc ID: 50889469
Document Uncontrolled if Printed
Approved: April 2019



Planning a Work Order Work Instruction


Purpose
The purpose of the document is to enable users to review, identify and populate the task and resources required for a Work Order in Maximo. It provides guidance as to what is minimum required to be populated. 

The planning of a work order is to provide the necessary information required by Service Provider to ensure the work can be performed safely and efficiently.

This typically applies to Non Urgent work orders that were not generated from a Job Plan. 
E.g. Not a PM Work Orders

Scope
This document will detail how to develop the minimum required information for Non Urgent work orders already created in Maximo.

The planning of a work order provides a detailed description of work tasks, labor, materials and tools to be performed for a job. The Work Order Tracking (HSE) application is used to revise work order information and change status. 

In the planning of a work order one must consider the following major components:

• Tasks
• Control of Work
• Duration
• Craft/Crew
• Labor Hours
• Materials
• Services
• Tools

There are other items to consider in addition to what has been listed and are identified in this Work Instruction. 

For planning a Job Plan see ‘CORP AM WI Creating a Job Plan.docx’



Prerequisite
There is an assumption that users have access to Maximo and possess basic knowledge of how Maximo operates.

For users which require an introduction to Maximo, Melbourne Water has training and support documents which are available via the Melbourne Water intranet at: 
Asset Management Information System (AMIS) Information & Training Resources


References 
Standards and Related Documents
CORP AM WI Creating a Job Plan.docx 
CORP AM BPM.vsd
CORP AM PRO Maintenance Planning.docx
WO, JP and PM Planning Checklist
AM PRO Planned Maintenance Initiation.docx
Control of Work
CORP_H&S_PRO_-_Management_of_Change.docx
Create Job Plan Quick Reference Guide
Service Request

Work Order Overview

In planning a work order:
• first review the work order details to confirm that you have enough information to be able to plan the work order.
• if more detail is required then contact the creator of the work order for clarification.
• if required check to see if there is an existing Job Plan that could be used to produce the required information and associate that PM to the work order.
• if detailed scoping is required then arrange for a qualified person to review the job and populate the ‘Work Order and Job Plan Planning Checklist’.
• populate the work order with the required information.
• once the work order is planned then change the status of the work order. If the work order creator has requested Execution Approval then select the status of Waiting Approval (WAPPR). If you are waiting on confirmation of materials or services then you can choose Waiting for Materials (WMATL) otherwise select Waiting Scheduling (WSCHED).



Section
Go to
Work Order Tracking Application
Section 1
Work Order tab
Section 2
Plans tab
Section 3
Details tab
Section 4
Regulations tab - Reference
Section 5
Approvals tab
Section 6
Work Order Status Change
Section 7


Section 1 Work Order Tracking Application

The Work Order Tracking (HSE) application Work Order page is shown and numbered items are described briefly below.
Select the Work Order required to be planned via the Work Order Tracking (HSE) list screen.
Once you enter the work order number the below tabs will be at the top of the work order.



As a minimum requirement the following tabs will be referred to in this work instruction.
• Work Order
• Plans
• Specifications
• Details
• Regulations
• Approvals



Section 2 Work Order Tab

The following details what fields are to be reviewed and have to be populated for planning a work order. Unless already pre-populated, the mandatory fields for population and consideration are boxed in red. This is a brief introduction to the fields and more details on how to will be covered in a later section.

Generally work orders that require planning will have a status of Estimate and Plan (ESTPLAN).

Work Order tab




Item 
Description
2.1
Work Order Number and Description – this is the work order number generated at the time of creation and description of the problem and work required to be done. If required more detail can be in and added to the Long Description. 
2.2
Location - this will show the Location number and the Location Name selected at the time the work order was created and is the location that the work is required to be performed.
2.3
Asset - the displays the asset number and name of the asset that is installed at the location. In most cases this carries the same name as the location but can be different especially in the case where the asset has been identified as a rotable. 
2.4
Status - this is the status of the work order. In most cases this will have a status of ESTPLAN at the time of planning.
This is where the status is changed once planning is complete.
The status options will be:
• WSCHED - Waiting to be Scheduled
• PNDCAN – Pending Cancellation
• WAPPR – Waiting on Approval
• WMATL – Waiting on Material

Note: see Section 8 – Work Order Status Change on how to change the status.
2.5
Discipline - the Discipline to perform the work is nominated by the work order creator. Whilst there may be different disciplines of Craft associated with a job, business rules dictate that the Discipline in control of the job is selected. Ensure the discipline shown is the Discipline that will be in control of the job.
2.6
Attachments – Associated documents can be added to the Job Plan here. The attachments will carry down to any generated WOs.
Note: see Section 4 – Attachments on how to attach documents, etc.
2.7
Job Plan – when planning a Work Order there may be an existing Job Plan that provides all the associated information for performing the requested task. 
Review the existing Job Plans and if there is one suitable then it can be associated here.
The resources identified on the associated Job Plan will be transferred to the Work Order.
2.8
Use Manual Estimate – if the identification of labor, materials, services and tools does not accurately reflect the cost of performing the work a manual estimate can be applied. Tick this box if you will be using a manual estimate.
2.9

anual Estimate – if you have chosen to use a manual estimate and ‘Use Manual Estimate’ has been ticked then enter your estimate here for performing the work.
2.10
Calculated Total Estimate – Maximo will calculate the total estimate of performing the work based on the associated costs on what was identified in the Labor, Materials, Services and Tools.
2.11
Total Estimate – the total estimate is captured from the Manual Estimate or the Calculated Total Estimate. If a Manual Estimate has been entered then this value is chosen above the Calculated Total Estimate for this field. 
2.12
Target Start – this is the date defaulted or selected by the work order creator for the work to start. If this date is not able to be met then contact the creator and negotiate a suitable date.
2.13
Schedule Start – once the job has been planned and a suitable date has been determined that the work can be perform then enter that date hear. This will inform the Scheduler of the date it is required to be done.
2.14
Required Asset Downtime? – if the asset is required to be offline to perform the work then tick this box and enter the estimated asset downtime (Hrs) in the ‘Asset Downtime (Hrs)’ field.
2.15
Asset Downtime (Hrs) – if ‘Required Asset Downtime?’ was ticked then enter the estimated downtime in hours.
This helps determine a suitable time to perform the work so as to reduce the impact on production.
2.16
Duration - the length of a job to be completed from start to finish in hours. This is not to be confused with Labor Hours.
Note: the total of labor hours may not add up to the duration of the job. E.g. If two people are working in parallel (i.e. at the same time) then the duration is most likely to be the longest labor hours of the two resources. However if two people are work in series (i.e. when one person finishes the other person starts) then it is likely to be the sum of the labor hours of the two resources.
2.17
Condition of Work – this where the type of isolation required to perform the work is nominated. Select from the options provided.
2.18
Interruptible? – this is to nominate if the job can be interrupted by something more important. As a default this comes already ticked.


Section 3.1 Plans tab - Tasks

This section is for developing the Work Order Tasks. The Tasks are the minimum required steps to ensure the work order can be completed efficiently and as expected with the required quality.

Plans tab


Item 
Description
3.1.1
New Row – this generates a new task.
3.1.2
Task number and Task Description - the Task is allocated a number and the Description is where the Task is described. If more information needs to be entered it can be entered in the Long Description by clicking the circled icon.
The current rules for JP task are:

Job Plan tasks should conform to the following guidelines.

• Tasks must be limited to 100 characters.
• Tasks must be numbered in increments of 10, in the required sequence of execution.
• Tasks should explicitly describe the required action to achieve the work outcome. 
• Tasks should be clear, direct and worded as a directive needing completion. 
• Tasks should eliminate the need for interpretation by the person performing the work.
• Tasks should be written in a clear and detailed manner, leaving no room for confusion or doubt.
• Standard practice tasks should not be included on a Job Plan e.g. Raise an SR for defects

Tips for writing Job plan tasks
• Use plain everyday English, preference simple language wherever possible 
• Write clear sentences, preferably less than 20 words
• Use an active voice when writing tasks
• Use words with a defined and understood meaning 
• Avoid using slang or jargon
• Avoid complex technical language, wherever possible 
• Avoid using “If applicable” statements 
• Remove unnecessary words for tasks, less words are often clearer 





Section 3.2 Plans tab - Labor

This identifies the list of Labor, Crews or Crafts for the Work Order. All required internal Labor Craft Resources are entered here. Note: this is not for subcontract labor.

Use the Planned Labor records to enter the Craft or Crews required for the job. For example, if a combination of electricians and mechanical technicians are required, 2 records (Row) will need to be entered. 

Plans tab - Labor


Item 
Description
3.2.1
New Row - this generates a new labor entry
3.2.2
Crew Type – Crews are usually made up of more than one person that work together to perform specific types of work (e.g. WL-NRM WLD NRM Crew of 2). 
Select from the list the relevant Crew Type.
3.2.3
Craft - here is where the type of Labor resource required to perform the work is selected. 
At the time this was written, there are approximately 600 types of Craft. When selecting Craft, select the ‘generic’ type as opposed to the Crafts with the level breakdowns. 
This is not flagged but some of the ‘generic’ Crafts are as follows:
• Craft
• Skill Level
• Description
• Vendor
• Contract
• Organization
• CIV_LAB
• -
• CIVIL LABOURER
• -
• -
• MWO
• ELEC_TEC
• -
• ELECTRICAL TECHNICIAN
• -
• -
• MWO
• INST_TEC
• -
• INSTRUMENTATION TECHNICIAN
• -
• -
• MWO
• MECH_TEC
• -
• MECHANICAL TECHNICIAN
• -
• -
• MWO
• PLC_PROG
• -
• PLC PROGRAMMER
• -
• -
• MWO
• INVN_OFF
• -
• INVENTORY OFFICIER
• -
• -
• MWO
The Craft is usually associated with a discipline as in the table above. For each different Craft type a separate row must be created. Each Craft will only need to be nominated once and can have deferent quantity (people) for that craft.
3.2.4
Required Qualifications - if required this is where the Qualification of a Craft is entered; i.e. any defined skillset required by the Craft in the Job Plan. In cases where there is more than 1 Qualification or skillset required, the more dominant or the limiting Qualification is chosen. Separate rows can be added for identical Craft if required.
There is not always a required qualification.
3.2.5
Quantity – the required number of each type of Craft. 
E.g. if three mechanical technicians are required for the job, then 3 would be entered in this field.
3.2.6
Regular Hours – here is where you enter effort hours required each craft.
E.g. if each of the above Mechanical Technicians where require for the whole day then you would enter 8 in this field. 
The system will multiply these hours by the Quantity and the rate.
3.2.7
Rate – this field is automatically populated based on the Craft chosen. 
3.2.8
Line Cost – this is system populated based on Quantity x Hours x Rate. Ensure this has a value relevant to the associated required labor.
This value is used by the system when producing the ‘Calculated Total Estimate’.


Section 3.3 Plans tab - Materials

This identifies the list of materials required to complete the work order. This can include store inventory items, consignment, purchases and Vendor Managed Inventory (VMI). 
Note: all items must be in the Item Master including materials identified for Direct Issue.

Plans tab - Materials 


Item 
Description
3.3.1
Item - The Item is an item or material required to perform the work and is selected via the chevron (>):  Select Value.
Each different item will need to be identified on a separate row.
Note: see Line Type to allow the entry of a material that is not in Item Master.
3.3.2
Line Type – this field allows a selection of Item or Material. The default for this field is Item. ‘Item’ allows you to choose in the Item field from the Item Master and ‘Material’ allows you to enter in Item a description of a material to be purchased not in the Item Master.
Choosing Material also automatically ticks Direct Issue?.
3.3.3
Quantity – enter the number of the required Items with reference to the Order Unit
3.3.4
Order Unit – choose the Unit of Measure for the Item. (e.g. Box, Ea)
Note: the quantity is to be with reference to the unit of measure. 
3.3.5
Unit Cost – this will be populated by the system if the item has been chosen from the Item Master. You must manually populate this field if it is identified with a Line Type of Material or if the Unit Cost is not automatically populated.
3.3.6
Line Cost - this will be populated by the system if the item has been chosen from the Item Master. You must manually populate this field if it is identified with a Line Type of Material or if the Unit Cost is not automatically populated.
3.3.7
Direct Issue? - when ticked, it signifies that a purchase requisition requires generation for the nominated Vendor rather than obtaining the item from inventory at a Storeroom. Ticking this box signifies that the material will be direct purchased. 
3.3.8
Vendor – this field identifies the Vendor the Material is to be purchased from. Select the relevant Vendor from the list.
3.3.9
Required Date – this field defaults to the Schedule Start Date. If it is required by another date then select the relevant date. This will be particularly relevant when procurement is done via Maximo.
3.3.10
New Row - this generates a new material entry

Note: In the event the required Material item is not listed, a request can be made for its addition to the Item Master as an Item via the store person using the CORP AM FOR Inventory AMIS Catalogue Item Multiple Request.docx Form. However for an Item to be added to the storeroom as inventory so it can be purchased as inventory (stock), a request needs to be put through to the Melbourne Water Governance team. 

A one of purchase of a material where it is deemed will not be required to be purchased again can be made by choosing ‘Material’ in the ‘Line Type’ field.

Section 3.4 Plans tab - Services

This section is for any purchases for engagement of subcontractor services and includes hire of equipment. Examples include: hire of educator truck, elevated work platform (state specific type if known, e.g. scissor lift), hire of specific calibrator, crane or franna hire etc.

Plans tab - Services 

Item 
Description
3.3.1
Line Type – this field allows a selection of Item or Service. The default for this field is Item. ‘Item’ allows you to choose in the Item field from the Item Master and ‘Service’ allows you to enter in Item a description of a material to be purchased not in the Item Master.
3.4.2
Service - the Service Item is selected via the chevron (>):  Select Value.
Select the Service that best describes the service being provided. Is this like a Material with costs associated or just a description?
3.4.3
Quantity – enter the number of the chosen item units.
3.3.4
Order Unit – enter the unit for the service. E.g. if the service is provided by hours of service then choose ‘Hours’ or if the service is a cost for the whole service then choose ‘Lot’ or ‘Each’
3.4.5
Unit Cost – this will be populated by the system if the item has been chosen from inventory. You must manually populate this field if it is identified as Direct Issue?
3.4.6
Line Cost - ensure that a line cost automatically populates from entering the Quantity. If not it must be entered against the Vendor. This will be populated by the system if the item has been chosen from inventory. You must manually populate this field if it is identified as Direct Issue? Ensure this has a value relevant to the associated Services.
3.4.7
Required Date - this field defaults to the Schedule Start Date. If it is required by another date then select the relevant date. This will be particularly relevant when procurement is done via Maximo.
3.4.8
Vendor – the Vendor that will provide the Service. Where possible always select the Vendor relevant to the Service Provider (e.g. prefixed with WG). In the event the required Vendor is not listed, see note.
3.4.9
New Row - this generates a new service entry.
Note: In the event the required Vendor is not listed, a request can be made for its addition to Maximo via IT Support. 

Email the following table with details populated to It.Support@melbournewater.com.au:

COMPMASTER.COMPANY_R
COMPMASTER.NAME_R
COMPANIES.ADDRESS1_R
COMPANIES.ADDRESS3_R
COMPANIES.ADDRESS4_R
COMPANIES.ADDRESS5_R
ABN
XXXXXX

Name
Street Number and Name
Suburb
State
Postcode
ABN

Note: For the first column field COMPMASTER.COMPANY_R, If being requested by a Service Provider then enter the Vendor’s Number Preceded by the relevant SP code. E.g. WG for Wood.


Section 3.5 Plans tab - Tools

This maintains a Tool list for the Job Plan. This is for internal tools and equipment only. Examples of tools include tools booked out of the store such as a dry block calibrator, Multirae gas detector, thermography gun etc. 

Tools fall into 3 categories:
• Personal Tools – tools that are owned by the nominated craft labor (e.g. Electrician) and are expected to be provided by them. E.g. personal spanners and screwdrivers.
• Permanent Issue – tools that are provided to the labor permanently either to the person or to the vehicle. E.g. multimeter.
• Temporary Issue – are usually special tools not provided by the labor or 

Only Temporary Issue tools are to be identified here. 
Do not record here are any tools and equipment which need to be hired in. This should be recorded in Services.

Plans tab - Tools 

Item 
Description
3.5.1
Tool - select Tool required from the list.
Note: Do not select any Tool starting with “EQ” or “Equipment”. At the time this was written, it is advised the Tools starting with “EQ” were too generic and were going to be removed in the near future. For example, do not select TOOLME Equipment – Meter.
Note: For internal use of Tool, Eductor Truck which is booked out of the Eastern Treatment Plant, 2 Civil resources must be added to Labor. They do not automatically populate.
3.5.2
Quantity – enter how many tools of this type are required. Default is ‘1’
3.5.3
Tool Hours – enter the hours the tool will be required. The value in the job duration can be used to populate this field.
Note: This is only required if the tool is owned by anyone else other than MW. E.g. Service Provider.
3.5.4
Rate – this is the per hour the tools is to be charged to the Work Order. 
Note: This is only required if the tool is owned by anyone else other than MW. E.g. Service Provider. 
3.5.5
Line Cost – this is an automated field and is a calculation of Tool Quantity x Tool Hours x Rate. If this is a MW tool then the Line cost will be zero.
3.5.6
Required Date – this field defaults to the Schedule Start Date. If it is required by another date then select the relevant date. This will be particularly relevant when procurement is done via Maximo.
3.5.7
New Row - this generates a new tool entry.
Note: In the event the required Tool is not listed, a request can be made for its addition to Maximo. 

A description of the tool and its classification (1 of 3 defined below) to be included in the request. 

Rotating Tool 
A serialized tool used in works and is periodically returned to storeroom. It requires maintenance, e.g. chainsaw or a gas detector.
Generic Tool
A tool, not being an asset, that is recorded in the Tools catalogue.
A tool which is used in works and is periodically “returned” to Storeroom, e.g. fence post strainer. The tool must meet one of the following criteria:
Its location outside the storeroom needs to be known, but not which specific tool it is;
The tool’s use is planned, e.g. used in Job Plan.
Consumable
Has the characteristics of a Generic Tool but can generally not have a requirement to be returned to the Storeroom and have a very short life span e.g. Plastic bucket.  



Section 3.6 Plans tab - Attachments

Attachments are documents that can be added to the Job Plan and are then made available to the user to assist in the Work Order execution.

You access Attachments from the following Attachment icons in the Maximo JP.

To add a new file you must have the link of the document you wish to associate. This can be copied from Inflo as follows.





Item 
Description
3.6.1
Link - Find the document in Inflo and click ‘Copy Link to Clipboard’ symbol located on the line. This will copy the link to the clipboard. 
3.6.2
Copy the Open short link – select the drop down arrow and select this option.
3.6.3
OK – select OK and this will copy the link to your clipboard.



To associate this document via the link you have copied to the Job Plan, continue as follows.



Item 
Description
3.6.4
Click Attachments.




Item 
Description
3.6.5
Hover over “Add New Attachments”.
3.6.6
Click “Add New Web Page”.



Item 
Description
3.6.7
Select “Attachments” from the drop down. 
3.6.8
Paste the Inflo Link which was copied from Step 3.6.3 or from the register.
3.6.9
Keep the naming convention of the document the same as in the register/on Inflo.
3.6.10
Ensure this is ticked so the document is printed if the WO is printed. If the attachment is a manual, you may not want to tick this.
3.6.11
Click OK to complete.

Photographs, documents and other attachments can be added to the Work Order. 
It is preferred to link attachments from Inflo. 

Section 4 Details Tab

The field/s that need to be populated in this tab relate to control of work. It includes primary and secondary permits. This field also appears at the task level under Tasks, but control of work is not populated at the task level.
Refer to ‘CORP H&S PRO - Control of Work’ document for more information. 
Details tab

Item 
Description
4.1
Control of Work - Select the ‘Control Of Work’ tab from the ‘Details’ page.
4.2
Permit and Certificate Type - Note only one type can be entered per row. To enter another row, click New Row.
E.g. If the Activity requires a High Risk Permit, Hot Work Permit and a Confined Space Entry Permit, there would be 3 rows.
4.3
New Row - this generates a new tool entry.



Section 5 Regulations Tab

The Regulations tab is to be reviewed to see if there are any associated regulations that could be relevant to the planning of the work order.
Regulations tab

Item 
Description
5.1
Regulation – If populated ensure the planning of the work order takes any regulations into account.


Section 6 Approvals tab

When a Work Order is created the creator can choose for the work order to be returned to them after planning is complete so that they can review the costs and scope prior to the work order progressing to Waiting Scheduling.
This is identified by them ticking the ‘Execution Approval Required? check box.

Details tab

Item 
Description
6.1
If the ‘Execution Approval Required’ is ticked then this indicates that the Work Order creator requires an estimate for their approval before the work order progress.
In this instance after planning the work order is complete the Status must be changed to Waiting for Approval (WAPPR). Refer to Work Order Status Change section.


Section 7 Work Order Status Change
This section shows how to change the Work Order Status after planning is complete. 
The options available are:
• Waiting to be Scheduled (WSCHED) – this status is chosen if all materials and services are arranged and the Work Order is available for scheduling.
• Pending Cancelation (PNDCAN) – this status is chosen if for some reason it has been determined that this job will not proceed.
• Waiting on Approval (WAPPR) – set to this status if the Work Order creator has ticked ‘Execution Approval Required?’. From here the Approver will decide if to proceed with the work order.
• Waiting on Material (WMATL) – this status is chosen if there are materials or services required to be arranged and the Work Order creator has not requested Execution Approval.
Note: the Work Order Approver can also select this status if after WAPPR was set and they have approved the estimate.



Item 
Description
7.1
Change Status - to change Status of the Work Order, click the Change Status symbol in the menu on the left of the screen.
7.2
New Status – click the dropdown arrow at the right of the field a select one of the following options.
The options available are:
• Waiting to be Scheduled (WSCHED) – this status is chosen if all materials and services are arranged and the Work Order is available for scheduling.
• Pending Cancelation (PNDCAN) – this status is chosen if for some reason it has been determined that this job will not proceed.
• Waiting on Approval (WAPPR) – set to this status if the Work Order creator has ticked ‘Execution Approval Required?’. From here the Approver will decide if to proceed with the work order.
• Waiting on Material (WMATL) – this status is chosen if there are materials or services required to be arranged and the Work Order creator has not requested Execution Approval.
Note: the Work Order Approver can also select this status if after WAPPR was set and they have approved the estimate.

7.3
OK - click OK to confirm status change.


Document Controls 
Role
Name
Author
Angus Mackintosh
Reviewer
Taran Medcalf
Approver/ Owner
Warren Payne


Document History
[Only add details of previous two versions]
Date
Reviewed/ Actioned By
Version
Action
19.01.2019
Angus Mackintosh
1
Document Created





Planning a Work Order Work Instruction



Doc Name: CORP AM WI Planning a Work Order
Author: Angus Mackintosh 
Version: 1.0
Page 4 of 25
Approver: Kristina Sestokas
Doc ID: 50978811
Document Uncontrolled if Printed
Approved: April 2019






CORP ENV 0012 Reporting under NGERS - Calculating Fugitive GHG Emissions

Table of contents 
1.	Purpose	1
2.	Scope	1
3.	Risk Considerations	2
4.	Background	2
5.	Procedure 1 of 3 - Methane Emissions from Wastewater Handling	16
6.	Procedure 2 of 3 – Nitrous Oxide Emissions	34
7.	Procedure 3 of 3 – Biogas Flaring Emissions	39
8.	Uncertainty	40
9.	Records	44
10.	Definitions	44
11.	Stakeholder Consultation 	44
12.	Document History 	45

1. Purpose
This Standard Operating Procedure documents the process for calculating fugitive greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from Melbourne Water Corporation’s (MWC’s) wastewater treatment processes using the National Greenhouse and Energy Reporting (NGER) Determination. 
All MWC fugitive emissions calculations are completed in fugitive emission spreadsheets. There are separate fugitive emissions calculation spreadsheets for ETP and WTP. 
This SOP refers to fugitive emissions spreadsheets. The spreadsheets and this SOP should be updated annually to reflect any wastewater treatment process changes and improvements and changes to NGERS methodologies and legislation. 
Both the ETP and WTP fugitive emissions spreadsheets include calculations to determine the following:
• Procedure 1: Methane emissions from wastewater treatment
• Procedure 2: Nitrous oxide emissions from wastewater treatment
• Procedure 3: Methane and nitrous oxide emissions from biogas flaring
2. Scope
This SOP is applicable for reporting under NGER for the 2019/20 financial year. Three other SOPs provide further guidance for this procedure:


Note: The NGER emissions methodologies are generic and, in some cases, do not represent MWC’s wastewater treatment processes. This SOP has identified where this is the case to ensure results are appropriately communicated and compliant with the NGER Determination. 
3. Risk Considerations
Table 1 Risks considered within this procedure
Risk
Consideration
Environmental Stewardship
This procedure calculates a proportion of MWC’s GHG emissions in accordance with the NGER Act.
Financial Sustainability
This procedure underpinned the calculations used to calculate MWC’s financial liability for the Federal Carbon Pricing Mechanism during the 2012/13 and 2013/14 reporting years. 
Organisational Capability
This procedure has been developed to ensure that MWC meets all obligations under the NGER Act. 
Relationships
This procedure identifies the areas in the business responsible for data used in calculating greenhouse gas emissions under the NGER Act. 
This procedure facilitates regulatory compliance thereby supporting relationships with external regulators and departments such as CER, DoE and the Victorian Environmental Protection Authority (EPA). 
4. Background
MWC triggers participation in the NGER scheme. MWC must report GHG emissions, energy consumption and energy production via EERS. The key tasks for this procedure are documented below. Approximately 50% of MWC GHG emissions are fugitive emissions from wastewater treatment processes. This SOP details Procedure 1, how these emissions are calculated under the NGERS Determination and are informed by the NGERS Technical Guidelines. 
Table 2 Task and detail

Task
Details
1
Calculate the fugitive emissions from MWC’s wastewater treatment process
CORP ENV 0012: Calculating fugitive greenhouse gas emissions under NGERS 
2
For each MWC NGERS facilities, calculate;
1. Energy consumption and energy production
a. Electricity
i. grid
ii. self-generated
b. Fuel consumption
CORP ENV 0013: Calculating Emissions from Electricity & other Fuels

3
Entry into EERS Section 19 reports
CORP ENV 0016: Entering data under the Emissions and Energy Reporting System
4
Project Manage an external audit of the section 19 report
 

4.1 Scope of Fugitive Emissions Reporting and NGERS Calculation Methodologies Applied
MWC generates fugitive GHG emissions from its wastewater treatment processes. Other fugitive emissions sources such as the sewerage transfer system are not covered under NGERS and are not required to be reported. Table 3 documents the scope of fugitive emissions reporting for MWC under NGERS and the relevant NGERS Determination calculation methodologies applicable. This SOP refers to the NGERS Measurement Technical Guidelines, which support the NGERS Determination and detail NGERS methodologies for calculating GHG emissions. 
Table 3: NGERS Determination methodologies relevant to calculating MWC Fugitive GHG Emissions
Process
Fugitive Emissions
NGERS Methodology1
Method
Wastewater Treatment
CH4
Part 5.3 Wastewater handling (domestic and commercial), Division 5.3.3 Method 2 – methane released from wastewater handling (domestic and commercial)
2
Wastewater Treatment
N2O
Part 5.3 Wastewater handling (domestic and commercial), Division 5.3.6 Method 2 – nitrous oxide released from wastewater handling (domestic and commercial)
2
Wastewater Treatment
CH4, N2O
Part 5.3 Wastewater handling (domestic and commercial), Division 5.3.8 Wastewater handling (domestic and commercial) – Flaring, Section 5.38
2
Communication: Ensure CER, DE, MWC managers and users of NGER fugitive emissions numbers are aware that emissions from Bio-solids stockpiling from 2012/13 reporting year onwards is not included2. 
4.2 Methane Calculation Methodology
The NGERS approach to CH4 emissions from wastewater treatment processes “determines how much COD is consumed in the treatment process by converting it to a gas. Multiplying the COD consumed by the maximum methane emission factor (EF) calculates how much CH4 would be emitted if all the COD consumed is converted to CH4. Then, multiplying by the process-specific Methane Correction Factor (MCFww or MCFsl) to calculate the expected fraction of methane emissions for that particular type of process”3. 
4.2.1 Historical Variation to Methane Calculation Methodology for Anaerobic Lagoons
The NGER Determination represents a wastewater treatment plant (WWTP) with a single wastewater and a single sludge treatment process. The WSAA Industry Guidelines maintain the same NGER CH4 calculation principles4, but apply them over each wastewater and sludge treatment process to calculate the CH4 emissions for each treatment process (Sub-Facility). Then sums the results from each process to find the total CH4 emissions for the WWTP. 
This has been described as an “additive” approach. Between 2008/9 to 2011/12, MWC deviated from the NGER Determination to report CH4 emissions from the WTP deep anaerobic lagoons to provide an emission estimate that was more representative compared to the Determination5 and also applied the “additive” principle of the WSAA Industry Guidelines to calculate fugitive emissions from wastewater handling. 
MWC justified this under the NGER overarching Principle of “accuracy”. In December 2012, the CER directed Melbourne Water to apply the Determination without variation in order to comply under the NGER Act. The CER clarified that the NGER Principles were to be applied to the Determination, not as justification to apply an alternative methodology “notwithstanding issues with accuracy".
Communication: Ensure CER, DE, MWC managers and users of NGER fugitive emissions numbers are aware of accuracy issues related to the application of the Determination and that the fugitive emissions calculated are compliant, however possibly not representative.
4.2.2 Methane Emissions Guiding Equations and Concepts
The following are the guiding equations for calculating fugitive CH4 emissions from domestic and commercial wastewater treatment processes under NGERS. 
5.26 Method 2—methane released from wastewater handling
(domestic and commercial)
Equation 1: Overall CH4 emissions from wastewater treatment 




Equation 2: Sub-Facility emissions for wastewater treatment 


(3) For steps 1 and 2 in subsection (2), an operator of the plant must choose a treatment for MCFwwz and estimate the quantity of COD removed from the wastewater as sludge (CODslz). 
(4) For steps 1 and 2 in subsection (2), CODslz is worked out using the formula: 
 CODpslz + CODwaslz
where: 
CODpslz is the quantity of COD removed as primary sludge from wastewater and treated in the sub-facility measured in tonnes of COD and may be estimated using the formula in subsection (5). CODwaslz is the quantity of COD removed as waste activated sludge from wastewater and treated in the sub-facility measured in tonnes of COD and may be estimated using the formula in subsection (6).

4.2.3 Applying the NGER Determination to WTP and ETP
The application of the NGER Determination CH4 equations assumes that the wastewater treatment process can be described with a single MCFww for waste water and a single MCFsl for sludge (Figure 1).
Figure 1: NGERS Determination COD balance schematic

Both ETP and WTP consist of multiple wastewater treatment process steps, not a single wastewater or single sludge treatment process. MWC applies Equation 2 to each of these treatment processes separately. The total CH4 emissions for WTP and ETP are calculated by summing the CH4 emissions of the processes (Sub-Facilities) together (an “additive” approach) in order to be compliant with the NGER Determination:
• A single MCFww and a single MCFsl to be selected to represent the anaerobic fraction of the wastewater treatment process and the sludge treatment process respectively. 
• CODtrl and CODtro which are terms that close the COD balance for sludge treatment processes are zero as the sludge that is removed from the sludge drying pans is not “transferred out of the plant’ as per the Determination. Sludge harvested from sludge drying pans are stockpiled on-site and do not meet the CODtrl and CODtro NGER definition.  
• CODsl term
o Is a subset of CODw (i.e. that it is only sludge that has been removed from wastewater that has been treated in the plant for the reporting period)
• CODsl points specific to WTP
o Processes at WTP are often not annually desludged. This makes it difficult to measure WTP’s CODsl term. For WTP, the CODsl term can be determined based upon modelling and industry best practice. To determine the CODsl term at WTP the “Sludge Accumulation Model6” (SAM) provides an approximation of the amount of sludge in anaerobic pots and maturation ponds. If desludging occurs and a greater amount of sludge than SAM predicts is physically removed from the ponds or anaerobic pots this is the CODsl term used otherwise the SAM CODsl number is used.
Sludge accumulated in anaerobic pots



Dredged (physical)
Sludge Accumulation Model
COD T/year

55E
 
 
 
COD T/year=Dredged (physical) COD or if greater SAM COD
25W
 
 
 
COD T/year=Dredged (physical) COD or if greater SAM COD
Subtotal
 
 
 






Sludge accumulated in aerated Pond 1 and downstream of Pond 1

Dredged (physical)
Sludge Accumulation Model
COD T/year

55E
 
 
 
COD T/year=Dredged (physical) COD or if greater SAM COD
25W
 
 
 
COD T/year=Dredged (physical) COD or if greater SAM COD
Subtotal
 
 
 



4.3 Nitrous Oxide Calculation Methodology
Under NGERS, a single Emission Factor (EF) is applied to the total nitrogen entering a WWTP to calculate N2O emissions from any treatment process. Different EFs are applied to the total nitrogen in the effluent discharge differentiated by discharge environment. There is on-going international and domestic research7 in this field to improve the characterisation of N2O emissions. MW applies Division 5.3.6 Method 2 emissions of nitrous oxide released from wastewater handling (domestic and commercial).
Historically, the nitrogen balance included nitrogen removed off-site in recycled water. In 2013, following the CER’s directives8, this quantity of nitrogen was no longer included. The Determination assumes nitrogen is only removed from the plant as sludge transferred off-site (Ntrl or Ntro) or in treated effluent to a receiving environment (Noutdisj). 
Communication: Ensure CER, DE, MWC managers and users of NGER fugitive emissions numbers are aware of that the current NGERS calculation methodology for N2O emissions from WWTPs does not adequately characterise the generation of N2O from different treatment processes or receiving environments. This simplistic methodology does not inform mitigation actions through optimising or changing process conditions. Exclusion of nitrogen removed in off-site recycled water results in a small over-estimate of N2O emissions.   
4.4 Energy and Emissions from Flaring
In previous years, reporting of flared gas was not clear cut. However, the CER recently released an updated guideline (Reporting energy production and consumption guideline, V2.0, August 2017) which makes it clear (page 5) that only energy that is “combusted to produce useable heat or electricity or injected into a pipeline” should be reported as energy produced. Flared biogas is not to be reported as energy production.
Guidance on energy reporting:
1. Part 6.1 of the Measurement Determination outlines that the energy produced from the operation of the facility during the year must be estimated. Energy includes the fuels and energy commodities listed in Schedule 1 to the Regulations. (Also see the definition of energy in section 7 of the Act and in regulation 2.03 of the Regulations). Schedule 1 to the Regulations lists item 29 “Sludge biogas that is captured for combustion”. The guideline, page 4, confirms that energy production “can only be reported for those fuels and energy commodities that are listed in Schedule 1 of the NGER Regulations”
2. In Sections 5.25 and 5.26 of the Measurement Determination, when describing the method for calculating the methane released from wastewater handling (domestic and commercial) there is clear delineation between Qcap, which “is the quantity of methane in sludge biogas captured for combustion for use by the plant during the year measured in cubic metres in accordance with Division 2.3.6”, and Qflared, which “is the quantity of methane in sludge biogas flared during the year by the plant measured in cubic metres in accordance with Division 2.3.6”.
3. The guideline, page 3, also indicates the production of energy, as per NGER Regulation 2.25, means the “manufacture of energy by the conversion of energy from one form to another for final consumption by or from the operation of the facility, or for use other than in the operation of the facility”. Biogas that is flared does not meet this definition.

4.5 ETP Fugitives Emissions Spreadsheet
The ETP Fugitive Emissions Spreadsheet consists of the workbooks summarised in Figure 2 and Table 4. The sections of this SOP that follow provide guidance on how workbooks should be updated. 
Figure 2: ETP Fugitive Emissions Spreadsheet - Workbook Dependencies

Table 4: ETP Fugitive Emissions Spreadsheet - Workbook Description
 
Worksheet Name
Description
Annual Update Requirement
Documentation
Notes
Documentation of assumptions
Update with any changes including financial year date

Chart
Presentation of fugitive GHG emissions in chart format
Automatic Update
Summary
S
Summary page – total fugitive emissions
Automatic Update

CH4
Summary page for CH4 emissions calculations by process type. Year to Date and Annual Forecast (refer to Notes below for further details)
Automatic Update

N2O
Summary page for N2O emissions calculations. Year to Date and Annual Forecast (refer to Notes below for further details)
Automatic Update

Flaring
Summary page for emissions from Biogas Flaring. Year to Date and Annual Forecast (refer to Notes below for further details)
Automatic Update
Schematics
ETP
ETP schematic of COD inputs and outputs
* Flow and average annual quality are Annual Forecasts
* Total load documented is the Year to Date figure
Update with any process changes

MTBI
Calculation for EERS Inputs for “Matters to be Identified”
Update if EERS requirements differ
Data Extraction and Manipulation
Biogas
Biogas flow and composition data
Update with relevant financial year data

Gas norm
Calculation to normalise biogas data to NGERS standard conditions (15deg C and 1atm)
Automatically reads data from "Biogas" worksheet.

In Eff data
Plant influent and final effluent quality and flow data and manipulation
Automatic update with relevant financial year data

Dig In data manipulation
Data manipulation to calculate COD sludge influent to digesters
Automatic update with relevant financial year data

Sludge Quality data
Digester influent and effluent sludge quality data
Automatic update with relevant financial year data

Dig In data
Digester influent sludge data
Automatic update with relevant financial year data

Dig Eff data
Digester effluent sludge data and manipulation to calculated COD sludge effluent from digesters. 
Note: Digester south flow meter offset of 15,000 litres applied to meter data summed flow calculation.
Automatic update with relevant financial year data

Supernatant data
Supernatant from sludge drying pans quality and flow data
Automatic update with relevant financial year data

COD VS TS
COD:VS relationship calculations
Manually update with relevant financial year data. Reference data is from "Sludge Quality data" worksheet

N2O data
Flow and quality data for N2O calculations
Automatic update with relevant financial year data

SDP_Biosolids Data
Sludge Drying Pan and Biosolids data
Update with relevant financial year data
Other
Factors
NGERS Factors
Update with relevant NGERS updates
4.6 WTP Fugitives Emissions Spreadsheet
The WTP Fugitive Emissions Spreadsheet consists of the workbooks summarised in Figure 3 and 


Table 5. The sections of this SOP that follow provide guidance on how workbooks should be updated. 
Figure 3: WTP Fugitive Emissions Spreadsheet - Workbook Dependencies




Table 5: WTP Fugitive Emissions Spreadsheet - Workbook Description

Worksheet Name
Description
Annual Update Requirement
Documentation
Notes
Documentation of assumptions
Update with any changes including financial year date

Chart
Presentation of fugitive GHG emissions in chart format
Automatic Update
Summary
S
Summary page – total Fugitive GHG Emissions
Automatic Update

N2O
Summary page for N2O emissions calculations
Automatic Update

CH4 – Annual 
Summary page for annual CH4 emissions estimate calculations by process
Automatic Update

CH4 – Year to Date
Summary page for annual CH4 emissions year to date calculations by process
Automatic Update

Flare
Summary page for emissions from biogas flaring
Automatic Update
Schematics
Overall Schematic
WTP overall schematic
Update with any process changes

25W
25W Lagoon schematic of COD inputs and outputs
Update with any process changes

55E
55E Lagoon schematic of COD inputs and outputs
Update with any process changes

115E
115E Lagoon schematic of COD inputs and outputs
Update with any process changes

Lagoons
85W, 145A/B/C and Walsh’s Lagoons schematic of COD inputs and outputs
Update with any process changes

SDP
Sludge Drying Pan schematic of COD inputs and outputs
Update with any process changes

MTBI
Calculation for EERS Inputs for “Matter to be Identified”
Update if EERS requirements differ
Data Extraction and Manipulation
Biogas
Biogas flow and composition data
Manual update with relevant financial year data

25W_Data
25W Lagoon quality and flow data and manipulation
Mostly automatic update with relevant financial year data, some manual updating required


55E_Data
55E Lagoon quality and flow data and manipulation


115_Data
115E Lagoon quality and flow data and manipulation


Lagoons_Data
85W, 145A/B/C and Walsh’s Lagoons quality and flow data and manipulation


Diss_CH4
25W, 55E and 115E anaerobic pot effluent dissolved CH4 data and manipulation
Update with relevant financial year data

BOD VS COD



N2O data
Flow and quality data for N2O calculations
Update with relevant financial year data

SDP_Biosolids
Sludge Drying Pan and Biosolids data manipulation
Mostly automatic update, significant manual manipulation required due to variation from year to year of Operator data formatting

SDP_Biosolids Data
Sludge Drying Pan and Biosolids data
Mostly automatic update with relevant financial year data, some manual updating required of Operator data (volumes)
Other
Factors
NGERS Factors
Update with relevant NGERS updates

4.7 Fugitives Emissions Spreadsheet – Notes Worksheet
The first worksheet in both the ETP and WTP Fugitive Emissions Spreadsheets is the Notes Worksheet. This worksheet documents differences and/or changes to process and calculation assumptions compared to this SOP. 
Action: The reporting period dates (highlighted in yellow) should be updated to reflect the reporting year. Note that the current ETP/WTP spreadsheets are specific to the 2014/15 financial year and wastewater treatment processes during that reporting period. 
Table 6: Fugitive Emissions Spreadsheet – Notes Workbook 


5. Procedure 1 of 3 - Methane Emissions from Wastewater Handling
The procedure in the spreadsheets for calculating MWC’s fugitive CH4 emissions is as follows and should be conducted with reference to the MWC ETP and WTP Fugitive Emissions Calculation spreadsheets for the relevant year. 
1. Calculate the annual COD loads and biogas captured over the different treatment processes. This includes 
a. Updating relevant financial year quality data extraction
b. Updating relevant financial year flow data extraction
c. Data manipulation of quality and flow data for COD balances and biogas captured
d. Relevant financial year sludge data extraction
2. Perform the overall CH4 emissions calculation for each wastewater treatment plant
5.1 Procedure 1 of 3 - ETP Methane Emissions from Wastewater Treatment
Step 1: Calculation of annual COD loads and biogas captured
ETP – Schematic Worksheets
The ETP-CH4 Worksheet is a schematic documentation (refer to Figure 4) of the:
• Influent and effluent COD of each wastewater and sludge treatment process at ETP
• MCFww or MCFsl applied to each treatment process used to calculate the overall MCFww and MCFsl for ETP

Figure 4: ETP-CH4 Worksheet


The quality and flow data in these worksheets are referenced from the following Data worksheets and should automatically update: 
• Biogas
• Gas norm
• In Eff data
• Dig In data manipulation
• Sludge Quality data
• Dig In data
• Dig Eff data
• Supernatant data
• COD VS TS
• SDP_Biosolids Data 
Action: Updating required only if wastewater treatment process changes have occurred.
Data Worksheets - ETP
1. The data worksheets contain flow and quality and calculate the annual COD loads, expressed schematically by Figure 4.
2. Quality and flow data for ETP is maintained in Envirosys and ODS.
3. Quality Data is generally extracted from the Envirosys database via SQL Queries written in the ETP worksheet
4. Flow data is generally extracted via the Operational Data Store.
Data Worksheets – Features and How to Update 
1. The ETP Data worksheets consist of queries which extract relevant data from the database and some data manipulation to calculate the annual influent and effluent COD mass totals for each treatment process within each lagoon system
2. Queries have been set-up to automatically update upon opening the ETP Fugitive Emissions Spreadsheet
3. Manual entry is required for any data highlighted in purple. Some circumstances that may require data manipulation include:
a. existence of one or more than one quality identifier. E.g. the sampling location of digested sludge from the digesters may vary through the year depending on which digesters are on-line due to the maintenance schedule. 
b. when COD results are expressed in both mg/L and mg/kg requiring conversion to a common unit.  
4. Figure 5 is an example of updating a Data worksheet. It shows part of the In_Eff Data worksheet:
a. data extraction query for the quality identifier, ETPRAWSEW for raw sewage entering ETP
b. data extraction query for the flow identifier, IPS_TOT_BILL_MLD for the Influent Pump Station
c. flow manipulation to calculate total COD of the influent
Action: Mostly automatic update of Data Worksheets. Manual data manipulation and/or extraction required for cells highlighted in purple. 
Figure 5: In_Eff Data Worksheet

Data Worksheets – Summary of Quality and Flow Identifiers and Data Manipulation 
Table 7 documents the quality identifier and the flow identifier in the ETP LIMS Database associated with calculating the influent and effluent COD for each treatment process within each lagoon system. Table 7 should be referenced when referring to the ETP schematic and the ETP-CH4 worksheet. 

Table 7: ETP Influent & Effluent COD & Associated Sampling Identifiers
Parameter
Quality Tag 
Associated Flow Tag
Data Manipulation
CODw = quantity of COD in wastewater entering the plant during the year, measured in tonnes of COD
ETPRAWSEW
IPS_TOT_BILL_MLD

General Data Manipulation
CODeff = quantity of COD in effluent leaving the plant during the year, measured in tonnes of COD
ETPFINEFF
OPS_EFF_TOT_FLOMLD

General Data Manipulation
CODgbt bypass = quantity of COD in the GBT by-pass sludge stream
ETPESLDPSL
SAP_PS_DAYFLOW
General Data Manipulation
CODtwas = quantity of COD in thickened sludge
ETPESLDTWA
SCC_MON_TWS_PREFLO

General Data Manipulation
CODGBT = quantity of COD in GBT sludge
ETPGBTAVSL
SAP_29097FIT_FLOW 
SAP_29098FIT_FLOW
SAP_29099FIT_FLOW
SAP_29100FIT_FLOW
General Data Manipulation, with total flow = sum of 4 flow meters and conversion of L/s to ML/day
CODtertiary_sludge
ATTP_LAMSLD
DIG_SLG_FIT4133101_FLOW
DIG_SLG_FIT4133102_FLOW
General Data Manipulation, with total flow = sum of two flow meters and conversion of L/s to kL/day
CODex_dig = quantity of COD in digested sludge leaving the digester during the year, measured in tonnes of COD
ETPESLDAV
dig_slg_nth_flow
dig_slg_sth_flow
Note: Digester south flow meter offset of 15,000 litres applied to meter data summed flow calculation.
General Data Manipulation, with total flow = nth + sth (adjusting for calibration error)

CODex_SDP = quantity of COD in digested sludge harvested from the sludge drying pans for biosolids stockpiling during the year, measured in tonnes of COD
Special sampling requested or past quality data 
ETP Survey Data in accordance with BIOSOLIDS REUSE MANAGEMENT SOP MWCETP 01-030. Where survey data is unavailable refer to Section 0 for alternative volume calculation methodology.
COD = Volume X dry tonnes/m3 X %COD average
Refer to Section 0 if alternative volume methodology is applied
Further information on ETP flowmeters can be found in:
ETP Key flowmeters-Asset Numbers-Locations - NGERS.xlsx 
http://inflo/inflo/cs.exe/properties/33967732 

Figure 6: CH4 Worksheet

Action: Updating required only if wastewater treatment process changes have occurred.
Step 3: Calculate the overall CH4 emissions
Following Step 2, the overall CH4 emissions from wastewater handling will automatically update and be presented as per 
Figure 7. The calculations are performed in the entries bordered by the purple dotted line in this schematic. 
The CH4 worksheet in the ETP Fugitive Emissions Spreadsheet calculates and includes documentation of assumptions related to:
1. Total CH4 emissions for ETP. Refer to Section Error! Reference source not found. for definitions of the Year to Date and Annual Forecast totals. 
2. Influent COD and effluent COD of each wastewater treatment process. These are the cells highlighted in yellow which refer to data sourced and manipulated in the data worksheets (refer to sections 0 to 0)
Action: Updating required only if wastewater treatment process changes have occurred.

Figure 7: ETP Fugitives Emissions Spreadsheet: Summary page for CH4 emissions sub-facility calculations 


Action: Updating required only if wastewater treatment process changes have occurred. 
5.2 Procedure 1 of 3 - WTP Methane Emissions from Wastewater Treatment
5.2.1 Step 1: Calculation of annual COD loads and biogas captured
The following steps are required to calculate the inputs for the CH4 worksheet. 
WTP – Schematic Worksheets
The 25W, 55E, 115E & Lagoons Worksheets are a schematic documentation (refer to Figure 8 for an example of the 25W worksheet) of the:
• influent and effluent COD of each wastewater and sludge treatment process within each lagoon system at WTP
• Relevant MCF applied to each sub-facility at WTP 
• Other factors applied to COD balances

Figure 8: 25W Worksheet


The quality and flow data in these worksheets are referenced from the following Data worksheets:
• Biogas
• 25W_Data
• 55E_Data
• 115_Data
• Lagoons_Data
Action: All numbers in the 25W, 55E, 115E & Lagoons Worksheets are referenced - updating to the schematic and cell references are required if wastewater treatment process changes occur
Data Worksheets - WTP
Quality and flow data for WTP are maintained in the following databases:
• WTP Quality database in Envirosys
• WTP Flows from ODS.
Action: Most data sheets are updated automatically. Data that requires manual data extraction or manipulation is coloured or highlighted in purple. 
Data Worksheets - WTP Data Worksheets – Features of and How to Update 25W_data, 55E_data, 115E_data or Lagoon_data

1. The 25W_data, 55E_data, 115_data and Lagoon_data worksheets consist of queries which extract relevant data from the Quality and Flows databases and general data manipulation (unless otherwise specified to calculate the influent and effluent COD for each treatment process within each lagoon system
2. These Data worksheets are largely updated automatically upon the Fugitives Emissions Spreadsheet being opened
3. Figure 9 is an example of updating a Data worksheet. It shows part of the 25W_data worksheet:
a. data extraction query for the quality identifier, WTSM2 for the Western Trunk Sewer Manhole 2
b. data extraction query for the flow identifier, L55E for the influent to L55E Pot
c. flow manipulation 

Figure 9: 55E_data Worksheet


Data Worksheets – Summary of Quality and Flow Identifiers and Data Manipulation of 25W_data, 55E_data, 115E_data and Lagoon_data 
Table 8 documents the quality identifier and the flow identifier in the WTP Quality and Flows Databases associated with calculating the influent and effluent COD for each treatment process within each lagoon system. Table 8 should be referenced when referring to the schematic’s worksheets (“25W”, “55E”, “115E” and “Lagoons”) and the “CH4” worksheet. 

Table 8: WTP 25W Lagoon Influent & Effluent COD & Associated Sampling Identifiers
Parameter
Quality Identifier
Flow Identifier
Data Manipulation
CODw = COD entering 25W primary anaerobic lagoon from the MIC
WTSM2
L25W
General data manipulation
CODpotCOD_P1 = COD entering the aerated pond 1 from the anaerobic pot
L25P
L25W, L25AQpc
General data manipulation with flow = L25W – L25AQpc
CODpotCOD_ASP = COD entering the ASP from the anaerobic pot
L25P
L25AQpc
General data manipulation
CODASP_WAS_P1 = COD in Waste Activated Sludge entering pond 1 from the Aerated Sludge Plant
L25A3
L25AQwas
General data manipulation
CODexP1_Lagoons = COD entering the 85W/145W and Walsh’s Lagoon system from the aerated pond 1 
L25WP1
L25W, L25AQpc, L25AQwas
SDP_Supernatant

General data manipulation with flow = L25W - L25AQpc + L25AQwas + SDP_Supernatant
Note:20ML Adjustment L25AQbp
CODASP_P2 = entering Pond 2 from the ASP
L25AC0
L25Qpc, L25AQwas
General data manipulation with flow = L25Qpc - L25AQwas
CODeff = COD exiting Pond 10
L25W
L25Qpc, L25AQwas
General data manipulation with flow = L25Qpc - L25AQwas

Table 9: WTP 55E Lagoon Influent & Effluent COD & Associated Sampling Identifiers
Parameter
Quality Identifier
Flow Identifier
Data Manipulation
CODw = COD entering 55E primary anaerobic lagoon from the MIC
WTSM2
L55E
General data manipulation
CODpotCOD_P1 = COD entering the aerated pond 1 from the anaerobic pot
L55P
L55E, L55AQpc
General data manipulation with flow = L55E – L55AQpc
CODpotCOD_ASP = COD entering the ASP from the anaerobic pot
L55P
L55AQpc
General data manipulation
CODASP_WAS_P1 = COD in Waste Activated Sludge entering pond 1 from the Aerated Sludge Plant
L55A41
L55AQwas
General data manipulation
CODASP_P5 = COD entering Pond 5 from the ASP
L55AC0
L55Qpc, L55AQwas, L55AQin
General data manipulation with flow = L55Qpc + L55AQin – L55AQwas
CODP1_P2 = COD entering pond 2 from pond 1
L55EP1

L55E L55AQpc
L55AQwas
SCADA 4-1

Annual Forecast (annual flow * average COD concentration) with flow = L55E – L55AQpc + L55AQwas + SCADA 4-1
CODP4-P1 = COD from pond 4 to pond 1 return
L55EP4
POND 4 RECYCLE, SCADA

Annual Forecast (annual flow * average COD concentration)
CODP4_115EP1 = COD from pond 4 to 115E Lagoon Pond 1
L55EP4
L55E_115E
General data manipulation
CODP4_ASP = COD from Pond 4 to ASP
L55EP4
L55AQin
General data manipulation
CODeff = COD exiting Pond 10
L55E
L55AQpc L55AQin L55AQwas
General data manipulation with flow = L55AQpc + L55AQin -L55AQwas

WTP Flow Meters are listed along with asset numbers here:
WTP Flow Meters Asset List - NGERS.xlsx 
http://inflo/inflo/cs.exe/properties/34075922 

Figure 10: 55E Worksheet


Table 10: WTP 115E Lagoon Influent & Effluent COD & Associated Sampling Identifiers
Parameter
Quality Identifier
Flow Identifier
Data Manipulation
CODw = COD entering 115E primary anaerobic lagoon from the MIC
WTSM2
L115E
General data manipulation
CODP4_115EP1 = COD from pond 4 to 115E Lagoon Pond 1
L55EP4
L55E_115E
General data manipulation
CODeff = COD exiting Pond 8
L115EP8
L115E, L55E_115E

General data manipulation with flow = L115E + L55E_115E


Figure 11: 115E Worksheet


Table 11: WTP 85W, 145A/B/C and Walsh’s Lagoons Influent & Effluent COD & Associated Sampling Identifiers
Parameter
Quality Identifier
Flow Identifier
Data Manipulation
CODexp1_Lagoons = COD entering the 85W Lagoon system from 25W Lagoon Pond 1
L25WP1

L25W
L25AQpc L25AQwas SDP_Supernatant 
General data manipulation with flow = L25W - L25AQpc + L25AQwas + SDPsupernatant + L25Www
COD145W_drain
WF145W
WF145W
General data manipulation
COD85wB
85WB
L25W
L25AQpc L25AQwas L25W_gate c SDP_Supernatant WF145W
General data manipulation with flow = L25Wp1_85W – L145W (L25Wp1_85W = L25W-L25AQpc+L25AQwas+SDPsupernatant+L25Www)

Figure 12: Lagoon Worksheet


Data Worksheets – Summary of Quality and Flow Identifiers and Data Manipulation of SDP and SDP_Biosolids
Sludge is dredged (under-cover and open surface) from the 25W, 55E, 115E, 85W, 145A/B/C and Walsh’s lagoons intermittently. Most sludge accumulates in the deep anaerobic lagoons, however other areas in the lagoon systems require dredging over time. 
The CODin_SDP value calculated in this section is reconciled against the CODsl term in the MCFww and MCFsl calculations. 
Table 12: WTP Sludge Drying Pan Influent & Effluent COD & Associated Sampling Identifiers
Parameter
Quality Identifier
Flow Identifier
Data Manipulation
CODin_SDP
SDP%%IN


Sludge Pumped

General data manipulation with some manual updates required
CODsupernatant_return
No longer used in SDP CH4 calculations. Relevant for MCFww calculation for aerated lagoon. 
L25%%OUT

SDP_Supernatant

General data manipulation with some manual updates required
CODex_SDP
No longer used in CH4 calculations
SDP%%-COMPA
SDP%%-COMPB

Method 1*: Inert solids assumption
Method 2 (preferred): general data manipulation with flow = volume = survey data
*Method 1: Inert solids assumption
Where survey data of the biosolids stockpiles is unavailable, the volume of biosolids harvested from the sludge drying pans can be estimated by assuming that the inert solids entering the sludge drying pans does not change during the drying process:

1. for sludge entering the SDPs, TS1 [T] = VS1[T] + inert solids [T]. 
2. No degradation of inert solids within the SDPs, therefore sludge harvested is TS2 [T] = VS2 [T] + inert solids [T]
3. Quality sampling available for TS% and VS% of sludge pre biosolids stockpile harvest = TS2% and VS2%
4. Substitute TS2 [T] = TS2% X (Mass) = TS2% X (VS2 + inert solids) into line 2.
5. VS2 [T] = (inert solids/(1-VS2%)) - inert solids

Figure 13: SDP Worksheet


Action: Update SDP_Biosolids, SDP_Biosolids_Data sheets where required (purpled highlighted areas). This is due to the nature of data collection and variable operations. 

Data Worksheets – Summary of Quality and Flow Identifiers and Data Manipulation of Biogas
Action: The Biogas Worksheet is largely manually updated with data from SCADA. 
The daily average m3/hr for the following SCADA points are extracted:
1. WTP LAGOON 55E - GAS PLANT : Flare : 1 
2. WTP LAGOON 25W - GAS PLANT : Flare : 2 
3. WTP LAGOON 55E - GAS PLANT : Flare : 3
4. WTP 25W-55E GAS PLANT : AGL Flow
5. WTP LOAD MANAGEMENT : Gas Plant : AGL : Methane Percentage
Data Worksheets – CODsl
The outputs of this worksheet are:
A. CODsl term used to calculate the overall CH4 emissions of the plant (refer to, “A”)
The CODsl term for WTP is physically impossible to measure due to non-annual desludging. The CER have advised that “best industry practice”9 be used to calculate this term. For WTP this is the Sludge Accumulation Model (SAM)10. 
Sludge Accumulation Model: http://inflo/inflo/cs.exe/link/42551597
SAM documentation: http://inflo/inflo/cs.exe/properties/22406066

Steps to calculate CODsl terms:
1. Reference the SAM for annual sludge accumulation (VSS tonnes/year) of each process for each lagoon system 
Annual Sludge Accumulation
25W
55E
Covered Deep Anaerobic Lagoon
•
•
Aerated pond and downstream
•
•

2. Referring to COD VS Ratio worksheet, apply the appropriate ratio to convert the VSS tonnes/year values from SAM into COD tonnes/year.
3. To calculate the CODsl term used to calculate the CH4 emissions for the WWTP, sum the COD tonnes/year values for each lagoon system and each process
Figure 14: WTP Fugitives Emissions Spreadsheet: Summary page for CH4 emissions calculations




Step 3: Calculate the overall CH4 emissions
Following Step 2, the overall CH4 emissions from wastewater handling will automatically update and be presented as per Figure 14. The calculations are performed in the entries bordered by the purple dotted line in this schematic. 
WTP – CH4 Year to Date Worksheet
The CH4 Year to Date worksheet in the WTP Fugitive Emissions Spreadsheet calculates and includes documentation of assumptions related to:
1. Total CH4 emissions for WTP for the year to date. This is the figure that is reported in EERS. The spreadsheet is configured to cease calculating at the end of the financial year. 

Actions: Updating required if wastewater treatment process changes occur
WTP – CH4 Annual Forecast Worksheet
The CH4 Annual Forecast worksheet in the WTP Fugitive Emissions Spreadsheet calculates and includes documentation of assumptions related to the annual forecast of the total CH4 emissions for WTP. This is the figure that is reported in the Annual Report or other reporting obligations where not all sampling data is available (usually because the reporting obligation is too soon after the end of the financial year). Refer to Section Error! Reference source not found. for a definition including short-comings of the Annual Forecast. 
Actions: Updating required if wastewater treatment process changes occur


6. Procedure 2 of 3 – Nitrous Oxide Emissions 
The procedure in the spreadsheets for calculating MWC’s fugitive N2O emissions is as follows and should be conducted with reference to the MWC ETP and WTP Fugitive Emissions Calculation spreadsheets for the relevant year. 
1. Calculate the annual nitrogen loads over the wastewater processes. This includes 
a. Updating relevant financial year quality data extraction
b. Updating relevant financial year flow data extraction
c. Data manipulation of quality and flow data for nitrogen balances
2. Perform the overall N2O emissions calculation for each wastewater treatment plant
6.1 Procedure 1 of 3 – ETP Nitrous Oxide Emissions from Wastewater Treatment
6.1.1 Step 1: Calculation of annual total nitrogen loads 
ETP – Schematic Worksheets
The ETP-N2O Worksheet is a schematic documentation (refer to Figure 15) of the total nitrogen in the influent and effluent of ETP.

Figure 15: ETP-N2O Worksheet


The quality and flow data in these worksheets are reference from the N2O data worksheet. Data from the Reuse data worksheet is used in the ETP-N2O schematic worksheet, however is not included in overall N2O calculations. Nitrogen in recycled water transferred off-site to third party users is no longer included in the Nitrogen balance as per the CER.
Action: Mostly automatic update of data. Updating required only if wastewater treatment process changes have occurred. 
Data Worksheets – ETP
1. The data worksheets contain flow and quality and calculate the annual total nitrogen loads, expressed schematically by Figure 15.
2. Quality and flow data for ETP is maintained in Envirosys and ODS.
3. Quality Data is generally extracted from Envirosys via SQL Queries written in the ETP worksheet
4. Flow data is generally extracted using ODS.

Data Worksheets – Features and How to Update 
1. The ETP Data worksheets consist of queries which extract relevant data from the LIMS database and some data manipulation to calculate the annual influent and effluent total nitrogen mass totals
2. Queries have been set-up to automatically update upon opening the ETP Fugitive Emissions Spreadsheet
3. Manual entry is required for any data highlighted in purple.
4. The N2O-ETP worksheet is updated as per other data worksheets.

Data Worksheets – Summary of Quality and Flow Identifiers and Data Manipulation 
Table 13 documents the quality identifier and the flow identifier in the ETP LIMS Database associated with calculating the influent and effluent nitrogen for ETP. Table 13 should be referenced when referring to the ETP schematic and the ETP-CH4 worksheet. 

Table 13: ETP Influent & Effluent total-N & Associated Sampling Identifiers
Parameter
Quality Identifier
Flow Identifier
Data Manipulation
Nin
ETPRAWSEW
IPS_TOT_BILL_MLD

General data manipulation 
Nout
ETPFINEFF
OPS_EFF_TOT_FLOMLD
General data manipulation 

6.1.2 Step 2: Calculate the overall N2O emissions
The N2O worksheet in the ETP Fugitive Emissions Spreadsheet calculates and includes documentation of assumptions related to:
1. Total N2O emissions for ETP. Refer to Section Error! Reference source not found. for definitions of the Year to Date and Annual Forecast totals. 
2. Influent total nitrogen and effluent total nitrogen of each wastewater treatment process. These are cells highlighted in yellow which refer to data sources and manipulated in the data worksheets. 
3. Relevant environmental discharge factors (EFsecij and EFdisij)








Figure 16: N2O Worksheet






6.2 Procedure 1 of 3 – WTP Nitrous Oxide Emissions from Wastewater Treatment
6.2.1 Step 1: Calculation of annual total nitrogen loads 
WTP – Schematic Worksheets
The N2O Worksheet is a schematic documentation (refer to Figure 17) of the total nitrogen in the influent and effluent of ETP.

Figure 17: WTP N2O Worksheet


The quality and flow data in these worksheets are reference from the N2O data worksheet. Data from the Reuse data worksheet is used in the WTP-N2O schematic worksheet, however is not included in overall N2O calculations. Nitrogen in recycled water transferred off-site to third party users is no longer included in the Nitrogen balance as per the CER.

Action: Mostly automatic update of data. Updating required only if wastewater treatment process changes have occurred. 
Data Worksheets – WTP
Quality and flow data for WTP are maintained in the following databases:
• WTP Quality database Envirosys.
• WTP Flows database Operational Data Store.
Data Worksheets – Features and How to Update 
1. The N2O data worksheets consist of queries which extract relevant data from the Quality and Flows databases and general data manipulation 
2. These Data worksheets are largely updated automatically upon the WTP Fugitives Emissions Spreadsheet being opened
3. Manual entry is required for any data highlighted in purple.
4. The N2O-WTP worksheet is updated as per other data worksheets 

Data Worksheets – Summary of Quality and Flow Identifiers and Data Manipulation 
Table 14 documents the quality identifier and the flow identifier in the WTP Flow and Quality Databases associated with calculating the influent and effluent nitrogen for WTP. Table 13 should be referenced when referring to the WTP schematic and the N2O worksheet. 



Table 14: WTP Influent & Effluent total-N & Associated Sampling Identifiers
Parameter
Quality Identifier
Flow Identifier
Data Manipulation
Nin
WTSM2
MIC
General data manipulation 
TKN
Nout = Nout_145W + Nout_015E + Nout_murtcaim + Nout_borrie
WF015E
WF145W
WF500L
WF500M
WF145W
WF015E 
WF500M
WF500L
General data manipulation with flow = WF015E + WF145W + WF500M + WF500L
quality = TKN + NO2 + NO3 
Total-N applied to Ej_recycled water leaving WTP
SRWMAIN
SRWMAIN
General data manipulation with quality = TKN + NO2 + NO3
Note: included for internal purposes not for NGER

Nin: Denitrification/Nitrification not occurring at the inlet, therefore only monitoring of TKN is acceptable11
Nout: Currently only 145W and 15E Main drain are included because Lake Borrie and T-section lagoons do not serve a treatment function12

Step 2: Calculate the overall N2O emissions
The N2O worksheet in the WTP Fugitive Emissions Spreadsheet calculates and includes documentation of assumptions related to:
1. Total N2O emissions for WTP. Refer to Section Error! Reference source not found. for definitions of the Year to Date and Annual Forecast totals. 
2. Influent total nitrogen and effluent total nitrogen. These are cells highlighted in yellow which refer to data sources and manipulated in the data worksheets. 
3. Relevant environmental discharge factors (EFsecij and EFdisij)




Figure 18: N2O Worksheet












Action: Note that nitrogen in recycled water transferred off-site to third party users is no longer included in the Nitrogen balance as per the CER.

7. Procedure 3 of 3 – Biogas Flaring Emissions 
Reporting on emissions from the flaring of biogas is part of NGERS reporting for Wastewater handling (domestic and commercial). 
Flared biogas is not to be reported as energy production.
• Flared biogas is reported as GHG emissions.

Figure 19 is the Flaring worksheet and is identical in both the ETP and WTP Fugitive Emissions Spreadsheets. Data is referenced from their respective Biogas Data worksheets and emissions factors are referenced from the NGERS Technical Guidelines, Table 2.3.2A item 29 sludge biogas capture for combustion (CH4 only). 

• Flared biogas is not to be reported as energy production.
• Flared biogas is reported as GHG emissions.

Figure 19: Flaring Worksheet


8. Uncertainty
8.1 Background
For scope 1 emissions, NGERS requires the reporting of the uncertainty level (the +/- confidence limits) so that there is a 95% probability that the true value of the estimate falls within the estimated confidence limits. “Estimates of emissions need only provide for statistical uncertainty” (pg 347 NGERS Technical Guidelines 2010). 
The uncertainty limits of emissions for each emission source at each of MWC’s NGERS Facilities must be calculated, aggregated and sub-totalled. These uncertainty limits must then be totalled for MWC as a corporation and reported in OSCAR. 
8.2  References
Chapter 8 of the NGER Technical Guidelines refers to the GHG Protocol guidance on uncertainty assessment in GHG inventories and calculating statistical parameter uncertainty (Sept 2003) v1.0 (“the Uncertainty Protocol”) for uncertainty calculation guidance: http://www.ghgprotocol.org./calculation-tools/all-tools 
Refer to SOP CORP ENV0013 for calculating the uncertainty limits of the emissions from fuel use. This Section provides guidance on calculating the uncertainty limits of the emissions from wastewater treatment.
Chapters 3 and 5 of the WSAA National Greenhouse and Energy Reporting for the Water Industry (Part 1)13 provides direction on interpreting the NGER Determination and the Uncertainty Protocol in light of ambiguity with calculating uncertainty limits for emissions that have been calculated using Method 2. 
8.3 Uncertainty with Uncertainty
The following points document issues with the application of the Uncertainty Protocol to emissions calculated following the Determination:
1. The case study in the WSAA Industry Guidelines calculated a T 600% uncertainty for fugitive CH4 emissions from one facility. The DCCEE have reviewed this case study and agree that the application of the Uncertainty Protocol is correct and that the dominating effect of having a small denominator in the total emissions calculation is the source of this unrealistic number. The small denominator is a fundamental aspect in the fugitive CH4 calculations for wastewater treatment. It relates to the guiding equation () where Fugitive CH4 emissions equal the difference between the theoretical calculation of CH4 emissions and the CH4 captured for combustion. A small fugitive CH4 figure penalises the facility by contributing to a resultant large uncertainty. 

2. The default uncertainty for fugitive emissions calculated using Method 1 is T 40%. It is expected that calculations using a higher order method (e.g. Method 2) should yield a smaller uncertainty. 
3. The Uncertainty Protocol method for calculating statistical uncertainty assumes:
a. The error in each parameter is normally distributed
b. There are no biases in the estimator function (i.e. the estimated value is the mean value)
c. The estimated parameters are uncorrelated
d. Individual uncertainties in each parameter must be less than 60% of the mean
If these conditions are not met, the Uncertainty Protocol refers to alternative methods for calculation, including Taylors Series and Monte Carlo. The CER has not provided any information on how to test these four conditions or how to conduct the alternative methods. MWC has requested this information via a submission to the “Efficiency of Reporting under the NGER Scheme Discussion Paper” (January 2013). This was noted in the subsequent webinar on the Discussion Paper, however no further information has been provided.  
8.4 Actions
Without further guidance from the regulator, assume the four conditions above are met and follow the following steps as applied from the Uncertainty Protocol and the WSAA Industry Guidelines. 
8.4.1 Steps for calculating 95% Confidence Interval (CI) CH4 emissions
Assume that the calculation of the uncertainty of the theoretical methane calculated under the NGER Determination (CH4gen) represents the uncertainty of the methane emissions calculated14. To calculate the 95% CI for the CH4 emissions for ETP and WTP:
a.  
(Uncertainty of CH4 emissions from the wastewater treatment plant)
i. 
(Uncertainty of CH4 emissions from wastewater treatment at the WWTP)
ii. 
(Uncertainty of CH4 emissions from sludge treatment at the WWTP)
1. 
(Uncertainty of the WW mass balance)
2. 
(Uncertainty of the sludge mass balance)
a. 
i. Uquality = 95% confidence interval of the quality activity data (e.g. COD). Assuming that the activity data is normally distributed, the 95% confidence interval can be calculated using the Student’s t-distribution, 
ii. Uflow = taken from manufacturers specifications and checked against calibration records. Default of 5% applied if information is not readily available. 

3. UMCF = the 95% CI for the methane correction factor. The WSAA Industry Guidelines have set this as 25%
4. UEF = 95% CI for the emissions factor for wastewater or sludge treatment depending on the process. The WSAA Industry Guidelines have set this to 0% as this factor is calculated using stoichiometry. 

8.4.2 Steps for calculating 95% Confidence Interval (CI) N2O emissions
1. Calculate the 95% CI for N2O emissions from the wastewater treatment process and the receiving environments
a.  
(Uncertainty of N2O emissions from the wastewater treatment plant)
i. 
(Uncertainty of N2O emissions from wastewater treatment at the WWTP)
ii. 
(Uncertainty of N2O emissions from discharge to the receiving environment)
a. UMB_i = 95% CI for the Nitrogen mass balance of the process identified. The denominator of the equation is the  N of the process. 
i. 
1. Uquality = 95% confidence interval of the quality activity data (e.g. total-N). Assuming that the activity data is normally distributed, the 95% confidence interval can be calculated using the Student’s t-distribution, 
2. Uflow = taken from manufacturers specifications and checked against calibration records. Default of 5% applied if information is not readily available. 

b. UEF = 95% CI for the emissions factor for N2O emissions. The WSAA Industry Guidelines have set this to 50% for both UEF

8.4.3 Aggregating Uncertainty limits for MWC Scope 1 emissions
1. Scope 1 sources for MWC: 
Emission Source
Uncertainty Calculation
CH4 and N2O emissions from WTP and ETP for wastewater handling
As described in this SOP
CH4 and N2O emissions from WTP and ETP biogas flaring
As per SOP CORP ENV0013 (NGER default)
Vehicle and stationary fuels
As per SOP CORP ENV0013 (NGER default)
SF6 leakage
As per SOP CORP ENV0013 (NGER default)
Acetylene use in welding
As per SOP CORP ENV0013 (NGER default)



Utotal = % uncertainty for the total of emissions for the registered corporation
F1 to Fn = % uncertainty associated with each emissions estimate (F1 to Fn) for the source
G1 to Gn = estimated emissions from each facility under the operational control of the corporation measured in TCO2-e
9. Records
The following are records that need to be kept in relation to this document:
1. Fugitive emissions calculation spreadsheets (Inflo)
a. WTP quality database
b. WTP flows database
c. ETP quality database
d. ETP flows database

2. Reporting – NGERS http://inflo/inflo/cs.exe/link/17650856
10. Definitions
Reference
Definition
NGER
National Greenhouse and Energy Reporting
GHG
Greenhouse Gas
CER
Clean Energy Regulator
DE
Department of the Environment
Section 19 Report
Report under Section 19 of the NGER Act which is due on October 31st each year.
EERS
Emissions and Energy Reporting System
CH4
Methane
N2O
Nitrous Oxide
11. Stakeholder Consultation 
Stakeholders
Strategic Planning: Sustainability and Innovation
Asset Planning: Treatment and Recycling
Operations and Maintenance: ETP and WTP
12. Document History 
Date
Reviewed/
Actioned By
Version
Action
18/6/2020
Energy and Emissions Data and Reporting Specialist
8
Yearly review and template update

1 NGERS Measurement Determination, 2008 and NGERS Measurement Technical Guidelines, 2010
2 CER minutes of December 2012 WSAA Meeting. Historically, MWC applied Part 5.2 Solid waste disposal on land to calculate CH4 emissions from Bio-solids stockpiling
3 NGERS Measurement Technical Guidelines, DCCEE, Part 5.3 Wastewater handling (domestic and commercial), page 310, 2010. 
4 Fugitive CH4 emissions are calculated by reconciling the theoretical CH4 generated with the CH4 captured from the wastewater treatment plant (WWTP). The theoretical CH4 generated is calculated via a COD balance, COD to TCO2-e conversion emission factor and the anaerobic fraction of the wastewater and sludge treatment process. 
5 The COD balance approach to calculating CH4 emissions assumes that the WWTP processes are steady-state continuous processes. Several water authorities operate large anaerobic lagoons where desludging does not occur regularly. The NGERS approach cannot easily be applied as one of the parameters (CODsl) in the balance is unknown. In addition to this, dissolved CH4 (a potentially significant parameter in anaerobic lagoons) in the wastewater effluent is not included in the COD balance. 
MWC is conducting research into this area, including the 2010-12 WTP Anaerobic Pots investigation by GHD and a Smart Water Fund project to validate and improve dissolved CH4 sampling. From the GHD study, for past NGER reporting, MWC assumed that for anaerobic lagoons (i.e. the WTP anaerobic “pots”), “the covers are perfectly sealed and the only “loss” of methane from the system is dissolved methane in the effluent. Conservatively, it can be assumed that 100% of this dissolved methane will be stripped to the atmosphere once it enters the turbulent zone of the downstream surface aerators or the POT COD pump station. In practice, this is probably not completely true as some dissolved methane may be oxidised to CO2 by methanotrophs, but presently there is no data to quantify this assumption.” 28/09/2009 Email from Jeff Foley following MWC internal NGERS workshop: http://livelink/livelink/livelink.exe/properties/10220272 (Livelink/Livelink (online)/Enterprise Workspace/Business Support Services/Strategic Planning/Corporate Planning/Energy management/National Greenhouse and Energy Reporting (NGER) Livelink File/20090928 Email from Jeff Foley re COD balance around Anaerobic Pot.msg)

6 In 2002 a detailed study, the Sludge Accumulation Model (SAM) was completed on the WTP influent, to predict the sludge production of the plant until 2025, to design and build the first stage of an appropriately sized sludge drying pan (SDP) facility able to handle the sludge produced. SAM has recently been updated (2010 Ken Hartley Study) to reflect process and operational changes and incorporate new process information obtained during recent studies. The new sludge estimates will be used to size the required upgrades for the sludge drying facilities at the WTP to be undertaken in Water Plan 3. SAM is updated annually. 
7 Examples: Water Environment Research Foundation (WERF), Columbia University, USA and University of Queensland, Australia
8 CER response to sub-facilities to divide up the treatment plant http://inflo/inflo/cs.exe/open/22213754; CER response CODsl and MCF direction http://inflo/inflo/cs.exe/open/22375287
9 CER response to historic CODsl and MCF calculations http://inflo/inflo/cs.exe/open/22375287
10 MWC believes that the best industry practice for calculating the CODsl term is the use of the Sludge Accumulation Model (SAM). The SAM is used by MWC Operations and Planning groups to predict the sludge production of the plant until 2025 to calculate the capacity of future sludge drying pans and also estimate dredging quantities required for plant operations. There is no conflict of interest in using this model as it was developed for the purposes discussed, not for the use of NGER activities. The SAM is the most comprehensive model of sludge production for WTP and its results are used to influence multi-million dollar capital investments. The original model was developed by GHD Pty Ltd in 2002. In 2010, independent consultants, Ken Hartley Pty Ltd, investigated the original approach and made recommendations to better model sludge production, based on desludging activity volume and quality data, including biomethane potential testing.

11 P:\MEL\Water Resources\Corporate Strategy\Energy and Greenhouse\06 Emissions\NGERS\Reporting\Reporting Data\20091005 WTP EPA REPORT 2008-09 Final 2409 (page 21)

12 P:\MEL\Water Resources\Corporate Strategy\Energy and Greenhouse\06 Emissions\NGERS\Reporting\Reporting Data\20090707 WTP documents (Will Steele)
13 P:\MEL\Water Resources\Corporate Strategy\Energy and Greenhouse\06 Emissions\Policy and Industry\20110000 WSAA Industry Guidelines\Water Industry Guidelines Stage 1 OR Livelink/Livelink (online)/Enterprise Workspace/Business Support Services/Strategic Planning/Corporate Planning/Energy management/National Greenhouse and Energy Reporting (NGER) Livelink File/Water Industry Guidelines Stage 1.pdf
14 When following the CER’s directive in applying the Determination to calculate methane emissions from wastewater handling, the overall guiding equation (Equation 1) is not always relevant. This is because in some years the theoretical emissions (CH4gen) calculated is less than what is captured (bQtotal). Therefore, in order to conduct uncertainty calculations that are repeatable and comparable year to year, it is assumed that the uncertainty of the CH4gen result (which is the last step prior to the logic argument of whether measured CH4 is deducted from CH4gen) is representative of the % uncertainty for the CH4 emissions from the WWTP. This also alleviates the issue identified in Section 8.3, dot point 1.
---------------


------------------------------------------------------------


---------------


------------------------------------------------------------





CORP ENV 0012 Reporting under NGERS - Calculating Fugitive GHG Emissions
Procedure





Doc ID: 15370547  
Page 1 of 3
Version: 8
Date:06/2020 
Doc Name: CORP ENV 0012 Calculating Fugitive GHG Emissions
Author: Energy and Emissions Data Specialist
Approver: AK&T Team Lead
Document uncontrolled if printed








CORP ENV 0012
Procedure





Doc ID: 12345
Page 1 of 3
Version: 8
Date: 06/2020
Doc Name: FileName
Author: Energy and Emissions Data Reporting Specialist
Approver: AK&T Team Lead
Document uncontrolled if printed






Water EMERG002 Earthquake Emergency Response

Purpose
The purpose of this procedure is to provide procedural guidance on responding to an earthquake event that has potential to affect Melbourne Water’s dams.
Scope
This document covers the notification and inspection procedures to be enacted following an earthquake event. 

Earthquake emergency response can be generated in two ways:
• either externally from our earthquake monitoring service provider or 
• internally from Melbourne Water staff member observations. 

This procedure covers both scenarios.
Definitions
Modified Mercalli Intensity vs. Richter Scale	
The Modified Mercalli Intensity (MMI) scale is a subjective measure of the felt effects of an earthquake at a particular location. The Richter Scale is a measure of the magnitude of the earthquake at the epicentre measured by instrumentation. The MMI decreases at distance from the epicentre whereas the Richter magnitude is of specific value at the epicentre for the event.
Procedure
All earthquake events that trigger this procedure must be recorded as incidents in the Incident Management System (IRIS).

Melbourne Water Corporation has an arrangement with the Seismology Research Centre (SRC), formally Environmental Systems and Services (ES&S), to be notified of earthquake events resulting in a Modified Mercalli Intensity (MMI) 3 or greater at any of our dam assets. 

The alarm from the SRC will be in the form of:
• SMS to the Dam Safety Alert (SMS) group;
• Email to the Dam Safety Alert (Email) group from DutySeismologist@gmail.com; and,
• Follow up telephone calls both to the Water Control Centre (WCC) and the Principal Dams Engineer. 
This advice will be provided as soon as possible but no later than 30 minutes during working hours or 60 minutes outside normal working hours.

Contact phone numbers for the SRC are as follows:
• Office hours   (03) 8420 8999.
• All hours Duty Seismologist at the SRC 0417 348 232.

Contact phone number for Water Control Centre (WCC) 9325 2666 (after hours this number is diverted to South East Water Limited (SEWL)).

Contact phone number for MWC Principal Dams Engineer (all hours): 0418 339 983.

Contact phone numbers for Dam Safety Duty Officer and Water Supply Duty Manager as per Duty Roster.

Externally Initiated Alarm

In the event of earthquake activity leading to a Modified Mercalli Intensity (MMI) 3 or greater at any of our assets, the SRC will send out SMS and emails to the Dam Safety Alert distribution lists, and telephone the WCC and Principal Dams Engineer and provide the following information:
• The time of the earthquake.
• The magnitude of the earthquake (Richter Scale).
• The estimated location of the epicentre and depth of the hypocentre of the earthquake.
• The likely “felt effects” (Mercalli Scale - Refer Appendix A), at any of the major storages.
• An indicative priority for inspecting MW’s dams which is based on the criticality of the storages, susceptibility to damage due to earthquake and consequences of failure.

The SRC is aware that calls to WCC “after hours” will be diverted to South East Water (SEWL) and they will provide the information to the SEWL Duty Operator.

The Duty Operator at either the WCC or SEWL is to immediately contact the rostered Water Supply Duty Manager and to pass on the full message received from the SRC. The Water Supply Duty Manager must contact and maintain communication with the Principal Dams Engineer or Dam Safety Duty Officer throughout the incident.

If the stated MMI at any Melbourne Water dam or other facility is 3 or greater an immediate inspection by the Water Supply Operators is to be arranged. Assets where the stated MMI is less than 3 may be inspected at the next available opportunity but no later than the following day. The inspection priority order provided by the SRC is to be followed, unless otherwise directed by the Dam Safety Duty Officer.

Internally Initiated Alarm

In the event that a Melbourne Water staff member at a dam site or other facility feels or suspects an earthquake has occurred, they are to notify the Water Supply Duty Manager of their observation. The observer is to estimate the intensity of the earthquake using the Modified Mercalli Intensity (MMI) Scale (attached) and communicate this to the Water Supply Duty Manager. (TAKE NO LONGER THAN 5 MINUTES).

The observing operator shall arrange an immediate inspection of dam assets within the vicinity regardless of the estimated MMI at the site.

The Water Supply Duty Manager shall contact the Principal Dams Engineer or Dam Safety Duty Officer and together they shall determine which other dams are likely to have been subjected to earthquake effects which may cause concern and arrange for immediate inspection. The Water Supply Duty Manager must maintain communication with the Principal Dams Engineer or Dam Safety Duty Officer throughout the incident.

The Water Supply Duty Manager and Principal Dams Engineer or Dam Safety Duty Officer may modify inspection priorities following receipt of information from ES&S on the specific intensity and location of an earthquake.

Inspection

The Water Supply Duty Manager shall contact the local Water Supply Team at any dam which has been subjected to an earthquake of MMI 3 or above and arrange for an immediate inspection of all critical facilities and features and of all surveillance observation points. Some symptoms of possible problems that maybe observed are as follows:
• Cracks, settlement or displacement on the crest, faces or abutments of the embankments.
• New seepage on the downstream face or abutments of the embankment.
• Embankment, reservoir rim and abutment slides.
• Increased or cloudy flows from existing springs, seepage monitoring points or drains.
• Structural damage to spillways, intake towers, outlet works and tunnels.
• Operation of the valves.
• Bulges/ settlement in the embankment.

The local Water Supply Operators shall undertake the inspection and report back to the Water Supply Duty Manager that the inspections have been completed and provide information on any aspect of the dam that appears to have changed as a result of the earthquake. The Water Supply Duty Manager shall report field observations to the Principal Dams Engineer or Dam Safety Duty Officer as they arise.

The Water Supply Duty Manager shall inform the Manager, Water Supply Operations and the Manager, Water Asset Management of all earthquake events that trigger inspection by MWC.

It should be emphasised that if the suspicion of a change exists, then it must be reported. If the Water Supply Duty Manager is in doubt regarding the importance of any observation, then he/she shall arrange for the Dam Safety Duty Officer to contact the relevant Water Supply Operations Team directly to gain further information.

Following receipt of inspection reports for all dams in question, the Water Supply Duty Manager is to send a summary email to the Principal Dams Engineer, Dam Safety Duty Manager and Duty Executive listing the inspections that have taken place and any issues found.

If unusual features or earthquake damage are observed at an asset the Dam Safety Emergency Plan (DSEP) for that asset must be enacted.  
Stakeholder Consultation 
• Water Supply Operations – Tommie Conway
• Emergency Management – Wayne Charlton
Document History
Date
Reviewed/ Actioned By
Version
Action
2/10/2004
Harry Broumis
1

2/5/2005
Glenn Collins
2

16/5/2007
Harry Broumis/Colin Hill
3

February 2014
Mark Arnold
4
Fully updated and converted to new SOP template
May 2015
Mark Arnold 
5
Organisational changes reflected 
July 2015
Tommie Conway
6
Reviewed and checked organisation structural changes & minor edits.
July 2015
Admin
10
Changed to version in line with Inflo, and took off DRAFT Watermark 
January 2019
Kristen Sih
11
Updated to include new arrangements with SRC for SMS and email messages to the Dam Safety Alert distribution lists.


Appendix
EARTHQUAKE - MODIFIED MERCALLI INTENSITY SCALE DESCRIPTORS
MM 1 	Not felt by humans, except in favourable circumstances - animals may be disturbed.
       Reported mainly from the upper floors of buildings more than 10 storeys high.
       Branches of trees, chandeliers, doors may be seen to move slowly.
       Water in ponds, lakes reservoirs, etc. may be set into seiche oscillation.

MM 2 	Felt by a few persons at rest indoors, especially by those on upper floors. 
       The longperiod effects listed under MM 1 may be more noticeable.

MM 3 	Felt indoors, but not identified as an earthquake by everyone. 
       Vibration may be likened to the passing of light traffic.
       It may be possible to estimate the duration, but not the direction. 
       Hanging objects may swing slightly. 
       Standing motorcars may rock slightly.

MM 4 	Generally noticed indoors, but not outside. 
       Very light sleepers may be wakened. 
       Vibration may be likened to the passing of heavy traffic 
       Walls and frame of buildings are heard to creak. 
       Doors, windows glassware and crockery rattle. 
       Liquids in open vessels may be slightly disturbed. 

MM 5 	Generally felt outside, and by almost everyone indoors. 
       Most sleepers awakened. 
       A few people frightened. 
       Small unstable objects are displaced or upset. 
       Some windows, glassware and crockery may be broken.  
       Hanging pictures move, pendulum clocks stop; start, or change rate.

MM 6 	Felt by all.
       People and animals alarmed.
       Many run outside.
       Difficulty experienced in walking steadily.
       Some plaster cracks or fall.
       Isolated cases of chimney damage.
       Objects fall from shelves, and pictures from walls.
       Heavy furniture moved. Unstable furniture overturned.
       Small church and school bells ring.
       Trees and bushes shake, or are heard to rustle.





MM 7 General alarm. 
       Difficulty experienced in standing. 
       Noticed by drivers of motorcars. 
       Trees and bushes strongly shaken. 
       A few instances of damage to Masonry. 
       Loose brickwork and tiles dislodged, stone walls cracked
       Unbraced parapets and architectural ornaments may fall. 
       Waves seen on ponds and lakes. 

MM 8 	Alarm may approach panic. 
       Steering of motorcars affected. 
       Masonry damaged, with partial collapse. 
       Chimneys, monuments, towers, and elevated tanks twisted or brought down. 
       Cracks appear on steep slopes and in wet ground. 
       Landslips in roadside cuttings and unsupported excavations. 
       Some tree branches may be broken off. 

MM 9 General panic. 
       Masonry heavily damaged, sometimes collapsing completely. 
       Frame structures racked and distorted. 
       Damage to foundations general. Frame houses not secured to the foundations shifted.
       Brick veneers fall and expose frames. 
       Cracking of theground conspicuous. 
       Sand and mud ejected, formation of fountains and sand craters. 
       Underground pipes broken. 

MM 10 Most masonry structures destroyed, together with their foundations. 
       Some well-built wooden buildings and bridges seriously damaged. 
       Dams, dykes and embankments seriously damaged. 
       Concrete and asphalt roads and pavements badly cracked or thrown into waves.
       Large landslides on river banks and steep coasts. 
       Sand and mud on beaches and flat land moved horizontally. 
       Water from rivers, lakes and canals thrown up on the banks.

MM 11 Wooden frame structures destroyed. 
       Great damage to railway lines. 
       Great damage to underground pipes.

MM 12 Damage virtually total. 
       Practically all works of construction destroyed or greatly damaged. 
       Large rock masses displaced. 
       Lines of sight and level distorted. 
       Visible wavemotion of the ground surface reported. 
       Objects thrown upwards into the air.

STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURE
Water EMERG002 Earthquake Emergency Response



Doc Name: WATER EMERG002 Earthquake Emergency Response
Author: Principal Dams Engineer
Version: 10
Page 1 of 5
Approver: Manager, Civil Assets
Doc ID: 3179569
Document Uncontrolled if Printed
Approved: July 2015





















































